The Invisible Man

A Grotesque Romance

by H. G. Wells

CHAPTER I.
THE STRANGE MAN’S ARRIVAL


The stranger came early in February, one wintry day, through a biting
wind and a driving snow, the last snowfall of the year, over the down,
walking from Bramblehurst railway station, and carrying a little black
portmanteau in his thickly gloved hand. He was wrapped up from head to
foot, and the brim of his soft felt hat hid every inch of his face but
the shiny tip of his nose; the snow had piled itself against his
shoulders and chest, and added a white crest to the burden he carried.
He staggered into the “Coach and Horses” more dead than alive, and
flung his portmanteau down. “A fire,” he cried, “in the name of human
charity! A room and a fire!” He stamped and shook the snow from off
himself in the bar, and followed Mrs. Hall into her guest parlour to
strike his bargain. And with that much introduction, that and a couple
of sovereigns flung upon the table, he took up his quarters in the inn.

Mrs. Hall lit the fire and left him there while she went to prepare him
a meal with her own hands. A guest to stop at Iping in the wintertime
was an unheard-of piece of luck, let alone a guest who was no
“haggler,” and she was resolved to show herself worthy of her good
fortune. As soon as the bacon was well under way, and Millie, her
lymphatic maid, had been brisked up a bit by a few deftly chosen
expressions of contempt, she carried the cloth, plates, and glasses
into the parlour and began to lay them with the utmost _éclat_.
Although the fire was burning up briskly, she was surprised to see that
her visitor still wore his hat and coat, standing with his back to her
and staring out of the window at the falling snow in the yard. His
gloved hands were clasped behind him, and he seemed to be lost in
thought. She noticed that the melting snow that still sprinkled his
shoulders dripped upon her carpet. “Can I take your hat and coat, sir?”
she said, “and give them a good dry in the kitchen?”

“No,” he said without turning.

She was not sure she had heard him, and was about to repeat her
question.

He turned his head and looked at her over his shoulder. “I prefer to
keep them on,” he said with emphasis, and she noticed that he wore big
blue spectacles with sidelights, and had a bush side-whisker over his
coat-collar that completely hid his cheeks and face.

“Very well, sir,” she said. “_As_ you like. In a bit the room will be
warmer.”

He made no answer, and had turned his face away from her again, and
Mrs. Hall, feeling that her conversational advances were ill-timed,
laid the rest of the table things in a quick staccato and whisked out
of the room. When she returned he was still standing there, like a man
of stone, his back hunched, his collar turned up, his dripping hat-brim
turned down, hiding his face and ears completely. She put down the eggs
and bacon with considerable emphasis, and called rather than said to
him, “Your lunch is served, sir.”

“Thank you,” he said at the same time, and did not stir until she was
closing the door. Then he swung round and approached the table with a
certain eager quickness.

As she went behind the bar to the kitchen she heard a sound repeated at
regular intervals. Chirk, chirk, chirk, it went, the sound of a spoon
being rapidly whisked round a basin. “That girl!” she said. “There! I
clean forgot it. It’s her being so long!” And while she herself
finished mixing the mustard, she gave Millie a few verbal stabs for her
excessive slowness. She had cooked the ham and eggs, laid the table,
and done everything, while Millie (help indeed!) had only succeeded in
delaying the mustard. And him a new guest and wanting to stay! Then she
filled the mustard pot, and, putting it with a certain stateliness upon
a gold and black tea-tray, carried it into the parlour.

She rapped and entered promptly. As she did so her visitor moved
quickly, so that she got but a glimpse of a white object disappearing
behind the table. It would seem he was picking something from the
floor. She rapped down the mustard pot on the table, and then she
noticed the overcoat and hat had been taken off and put over a chair in
front of the fire, and a pair of wet boots threatened rust to her steel
fender. She went to these things resolutely. “I suppose I may have them
to dry now,” she said in a voice that brooked no denial.

“Leave the hat,” said her visitor, in a muffled voice, and turning she
saw he had raised his head and was sitting and looking at her.

For a moment she stood gaping at him, too surprised to speak.

He held a white cloth—it was a serviette he had brought with him—over
the lower part of his face, so that his mouth and jaws were completely
hidden, and that was the reason of his muffled voice. But it was not
that which startled Mrs. Hall. It was the fact that all his forehead
above his blue glasses was covered by a white bandage, and that another
covered his ears, leaving not a scrap of his face exposed excepting
only his pink, peaked nose. It was bright, pink, and shiny just as it
had been at first. He wore a dark-brown velvet jacket with a high,
black, linen-lined collar turned up about his neck. The thick black
hair, escaping as it could below and between the cross bandages,
projected in curious tails and horns, giving him the strangest
appearance conceivable. This muffled and bandaged head was so unlike
what she had anticipated, that for a moment she was rigid.

He did not remove the serviette, but remained holding it, as she saw
now, with a brown gloved hand, and regarding her with his inscrutable
blue glasses. “Leave the hat,” he said, speaking very distinctly
through the white cloth.

Her nerves began to recover from the shock they had received. She
placed the hat on the chair again by the fire. “I didn’t know, sir,”
she began, “that—” and she stopped embarrassed.

“Thank you,” he said drily, glancing from her to the door and then at
her again.

“I’ll have them nicely dried, sir, at once,” she said, and carried his
clothes out of the room. She glanced at his white-swathed head and blue
goggles again as she was going out of the door; but his napkin was
still in front of his face. She shivered a little as she closed the
door behind her, and her face was eloquent of her surprise and
perplexity. “I _never_,” she whispered. “There!” She went quite softly
to the kitchen, and was too preoccupied to ask Millie what she was
messing about with _now_, when she got there.

The visitor sat and listened to her retreating feet. He glanced
inquiringly at the window before he removed his serviette, and resumed
his meal. He took a mouthful, glanced suspiciously at the window, took
another mouthful, then rose and, taking the serviette in his hand,
walked across the room and pulled the blind down to the top of the
white muslin that obscured the lower panes. This left the room in a
twilight. This done, he returned with an easier air to the table and
his meal.

“The poor soul’s had an accident or an op’ration or somethin’,” said
Mrs. Hall. “What a turn them bandages did give me, to be sure!”

She put on some more coal, unfolded the clothes-horse, and extended the
traveller’s coat upon this. “And they goggles! Why, he looked more like
a divin’ helmet than a human man!” She hung his muffler on a corner of
the horse. “And holding that handkerchief over his mouth all the time.
Talkin’ through it! ... Perhaps his mouth was hurt too—maybe.”

She turned round, as one who suddenly remembers. “Bless my soul alive!”
she said, going off at a tangent; “ain’t you done them taters _yet_,
Millie?”

When Mrs. Hall went to clear away the stranger’s lunch, her idea that
his mouth must also have been cut or disfigured in the accident she
supposed him to have suffered, was confirmed, for he was smoking a
pipe, and all the time that she was in the room he never loosened the
silk muffler he had wrapped round the lower part of his face to put the
mouthpiece to his lips. Yet it was not forgetfulness, for she saw he
glanced at it as it smouldered out. He sat in the corner with his back
to the window-blind and spoke now, having eaten and drunk and being
comfortably warmed through, with less aggressive brevity than before.
The reflection of the fire lent a kind of red animation to his big
spectacles they had lacked hitherto.

“I have some luggage,” he said, “at Bramblehurst station,” and he asked
her how he could have it sent. He bowed his bandaged head quite
politely in acknowledgment of her explanation. “To-morrow?” he said.
“There is no speedier delivery?” and seemed quite disappointed when she
answered, “No.” Was she quite sure? No man with a trap who would go
over?

Mrs. Hall, nothing loath, answered his questions and developed a
conversation. “It’s a steep road by the down, sir,” she said in answer
to the question about a trap; and then, snatching at an opening, said,
“It was there a carriage was upsettled, a year ago and more. A
gentleman killed, besides his coachman. Accidents, sir, happen in a
moment, don’t they?”

But the visitor was not to be drawn so easily. “They do,” he said
through his muffler, eyeing her quietly through his impenetrable
glasses.

“But they take long enough to get well, don’t they? ... There was my
sister’s son, Tom, jest cut his arm with a scythe, tumbled on it in the
’ayfield, and, bless me! he was three months tied up sir. You’d hardly
believe it. It’s regular given me a dread of a scythe, sir.”

“I can quite understand that,” said the visitor.

“He was afraid, one time, that he’d have to have an op’ration—he was
that bad, sir.”

The visitor laughed abruptly, a bark of a laugh that he seemed to bite
and kill in his mouth. “_Was_ he?” he said.

“He was, sir. And no laughing matter to them as had the doing for him,
as I had—my sister being took up with her little ones so much. There
was bandages to do, sir, and bandages to undo. So that if I may make so
bold as to say it, sir—”

“Will you get me some matches?” said the visitor, quite abruptly. “My
pipe is out.”

Mrs. Hall was pulled up suddenly. It was certainly rude of him, after
telling him all she had done. She gasped at him for a moment, and
remembered the two sovereigns. She went for the matches.

“Thanks,” he said concisely, as she put them down, and turned his
shoulder upon her and stared out of the window again. It was altogether
too discouraging. Evidently he was sensitive on the topic of operations
and bandages. She did not “make so bold as to say,” however, after all.
But his snubbing way had irritated her, and Millie had a hot time of it
that afternoon.

The visitor remained in the parlour until four o’clock, without giving
the ghost of an excuse for an intrusion. For the most part he was quite
still during that time; it would seem he sat in the growing darkness
smoking in the firelight—perhaps dozing.

Once or twice a curious listener might have heard him at the coals, and
for the space of five minutes he was audible pacing the room. He seemed
to be talking to himself. Then the armchair creaked as he sat down
again.




CHAPTER II.
MR. TEDDY HENFREY’S FIRST IMPRESSIONS


At four o’clock, when it was fairly dark and Mrs. Hall was screwing up
her courage to go in and ask her visitor if he would take some tea,
Teddy Henfrey, the clock-jobber, came into the bar. “My sakes! Mrs.
Hall,” said he, “but this is terrible weather for thin boots!” The snow
outside was falling faster.

Mrs. Hall agreed, and then noticed he had his bag with him. “Now you’re
here, Mr. Teddy,” said she, “I’d be glad if you’d give th’ old clock in
the parlour a bit of a look. ’Tis going, and it strikes well and
hearty; but the hour-hand won’t do nuthin’ but point at six.”

And leading the way, she went across to the parlour door and rapped and
entered.

Her visitor, she saw as she opened the door, was seated in the armchair
before the fire, dozing it would seem, with his bandaged head drooping
on one side. The only light in the room was the red glow from the
fire—which lit his eyes like adverse railway signals, but left his
downcast face in darkness—and the scanty vestiges of the day that came
in through the open door. Everything was ruddy, shadowy, and indistinct
to her, the more so since she had just been lighting the bar lamp, and
her eyes were dazzled. But for a second it seemed to her that the man
she looked at had an enormous mouth wide open—a vast and incredible
mouth that swallowed the whole of the lower portion of his face. It was
the sensation of a moment: the white-bound head, the monstrous goggle
eyes, and this huge yawn below it. Then he stirred, started up in his
chair, put up his hand. She opened the door wide, so that the room was
lighter, and she saw him more clearly, with the muffler held up to his
face just as she had seen him hold the serviette before. The shadows,
she fancied, had tricked her.

“Would you mind, sir, this man a-coming to look at the clock, sir?” she
said, recovering from the momentary shock.

“Look at the clock?” he said, staring round in a drowsy manner, and
speaking over his hand, and then, getting more fully awake,
“certainly.”

Mrs. Hall went away to get a lamp, and he rose and stretched himself.
Then came the light, and Mr. Teddy Henfrey, entering, was confronted by
this bandaged person. He was, he says, “taken aback.”

“Good afternoon,” said the stranger, regarding him—as Mr. Henfrey says,
with a vivid sense of the dark spectacles—“like a lobster.”

“I hope,” said Mr. Henfrey, “that it’s no intrusion.”

“None whatever,” said the stranger. “Though, I understand,” he said
turning to Mrs. Hall, “that this room is really to be mine for my own
private use.”

“I thought, sir,” said Mrs. Hall, “you’d prefer the clock—”

“Certainly,” said the stranger, “certainly—but, as a rule, I like to be
alone and undisturbed.

“But I’m really glad to have the clock seen to,” he said, seeing a
certain hesitation in Mr. Henfrey’s manner. “Very glad.” Mr. Henfrey
had intended to apologise and withdraw, but this anticipation reassured
him. The stranger turned round with his back to the fireplace and put
his hands behind his back. “And presently,” he said, “when the
clock-mending is over, I think I should like to have some tea. But not
till the clock-mending is over.”

Mrs. Hall was about to leave the room—she made no conversational
advances this time, because she did not want to be snubbed in front of
Mr. Henfrey—when her visitor asked her if she had made any arrangements
about his boxes at Bramblehurst. She told him she had mentioned the
matter to the postman, and that the carrier could bring them over on
the morrow. “You are certain that is the earliest?” he said.

She was certain, with a marked coldness.

“I should explain,” he added, “what I was really too cold and fatigued
to do before, that I am an experimental investigator.”

“Indeed, sir,” said Mrs. Hall, much impressed.

“And my baggage contains apparatus and appliances.”

“Very useful things indeed they are, sir,” said Mrs. Hall.

“And I’m very naturally anxious to get on with my inquiries.”

“Of course, sir.”

“My reason for coming to Iping,” he proceeded, with a certain
deliberation of manner, “was ... a desire for solitude. I do not wish
to be disturbed in my work. In addition to my work, an accident—”

“I thought as much,” said Mrs. Hall to herself.

“—necessitates a certain retirement. My eyes—are sometimes so weak and
painful that I have to shut myself up in the dark for hours together.
Lock myself up. Sometimes—now and then. Not at present, certainly. At
such times the slightest disturbance, the entry of a stranger into the
room, is a source of excruciating annoyance to me—it is well these
things should be understood.”

“Certainly, sir,” said Mrs. Hall. “And if I might make so bold as to
ask—”

“That I think, is all,” said the stranger, with that quietly
irresistible air of finality he could assume at will. Mrs. Hall
reserved her question and sympathy for a better occasion.

After Mrs. Hall had left the room, he remained standing in front of the
fire, glaring, so Mr. Henfrey puts it, at the clock-mending. Mr.
Henfrey not only took off the hands of the clock, and the face, but
extracted the works; and he tried to work in as slow and quiet and
unassuming a manner as possible. He worked with the lamp close to him,
and the green shade threw a brilliant light upon his hands, and upon
the frame and wheels, and left the rest of the room shadowy. When he
looked up, coloured patches swam in his eyes. Being constitutionally of
a curious nature, he had removed the works—a quite unnecessary
proceeding—with the idea of delaying his departure and perhaps falling
into conversation with the stranger. But the stranger stood there,
perfectly silent and still. So still, it got on Henfrey’s nerves. He
felt alone in the room and looked up, and there, grey and dim, was the
bandaged head and huge blue lenses staring fixedly, with a mist of
green spots drifting in front of them. It was so uncanny to Henfrey
that for a minute they remained staring blankly at one another. Then
Henfrey looked down again. Very uncomfortable position! One would like
to say something. Should he remark that the weather was very cold for
the time of year?

He looked up as if to take aim with that introductory shot. “The
weather—” he began.

“Why don’t you finish and go?” said the rigid figure, evidently in a
state of painfully suppressed rage. “All you’ve got to do is to fix the
hour-hand on its axle. You’re simply humbugging—”

“Certainly, sir—one minute more. I overlooked—” and Mr. Henfrey
finished and went.

But he went feeling excessively annoyed. “Damn it!” said Mr. Henfrey to
himself, trudging down the village through the thawing snow; “a man
must do a clock at times, surely.”

And again, “Can’t a man look at you?—Ugly!”

And yet again, “Seemingly not. If the police was wanting you you
couldn’t be more wropped and bandaged.”

At Gleeson’s corner he saw Hall, who had recently married the
stranger’s hostess at the “Coach and Horses,” and who now drove the
Iping conveyance, when occasional people required it, to Sidderbridge
Junction, coming towards him on his return from that place. Hall had
evidently been “stopping a bit” at Sidderbridge, to judge by his
driving. “’Ow do, Teddy?” he said, passing.

“You got a rum un up home!” said Teddy.

Hall very sociably pulled up. “What’s that?” he asked.

“Rum-looking customer stopping at the ‘Coach and Horses,’” said Teddy.
“My sakes!”

And he proceeded to give Hall a vivid description of his grotesque
guest. “Looks a bit like a disguise, don’t it? I’d like to see a man’s
face if I had him stopping in _my_ place,” said Henfrey. “But women are
that trustful—where strangers are concerned. He’s took your rooms and
he ain’t even given a name, Hall.”

“You don’t say so!” said Hall, who was a man of sluggish apprehension.

“Yes,” said Teddy. “By the week. Whatever he is, you can’t get rid of
him under the week. And he’s got a lot of luggage coming to-morrow, so
he says. Let’s hope it won’t be stones in boxes, Hall.”

He told Hall how his aunt at Hastings had been swindled by a stranger
with empty portmanteaux. Altogether he left Hall vaguely suspicious.
“Get up, old girl,” said Hall. “I s’pose I must see ’bout this.”

Teddy trudged on his way with his mind considerably relieved.

Instead of “seeing ’bout it,” however, Hall on his return was severely
rated by his wife on the length of time he had spent in Sidderbridge,
and his mild inquiries were answered snappishly and in a manner not to
the point. But the seed of suspicion Teddy had sown germinated in the
mind of Mr. Hall in spite of these discouragements. “You wim’ don’t
know everything,” said Mr. Hall, resolved to ascertain more about the
personality of his guest at the earliest possible opportunity. And
after the stranger had gone to bed, which he did about half-past nine,
Mr. Hall went very aggressively into the parlour and looked very hard
at his wife’s furniture, just to show that the stranger wasn’t master
there, and scrutinised closely and a little contemptuously a sheet of
mathematical computations the stranger had left. When retiring for the
night he instructed Mrs. Hall to look very closely at the stranger’s
luggage when it came next day.

“You mind your own business, Hall,” said Mrs. Hall, “and I’ll mind
mine.”

She was all the more inclined to snap at Hall because the stranger was
undoubtedly an unusually strange sort of stranger, and she was by no
means assured about him in her own mind. In the middle of the night she
woke up dreaming of huge white heads like turnips, that came trailing
after her, at the end of interminable necks, and with vast black eyes.
But being a sensible woman, she subdued her terrors and turned over and
went to sleep again.




CHAPTER III.
THE THOUSAND AND ONE BOTTLES


So it was that on the twenty-ninth day of February, at the beginning of
the thaw, this singular person fell out of infinity into Iping village.
Next day his luggage arrived through the slush—and very remarkable
luggage it was. There were a couple of trunks indeed, such as a
rational man might need, but in addition there were a box of books—big,
fat books, of which some were just in an incomprehensible
handwriting—and a dozen or more crates, boxes, and cases, containing
objects packed in straw, as it seemed to Hall, tugging with a casual
curiosity at the straw—glass bottles. The stranger, muffled in hat,
coat, gloves, and wrapper, came out impatiently to meet Fearenside’s
cart, while Hall was having a word or so of gossip preparatory to
helping bring them in. Out he came, not noticing Fearenside’s dog, who
was sniffing in a _dilettante_ spirit at Hall’s legs. “Come along with
those boxes,” he said. “I’ve been waiting long enough.”

And he came down the steps towards the tail of the cart as if to lay
hands on the smaller crate.

No sooner had Fearenside’s dog caught sight of him, however, than it
began to bristle and growl savagely, and when he rushed down the steps
it gave an undecided hop, and then sprang straight at his hand. “Whup!”
cried Hall, jumping back, for he was no hero with dogs, and Fearenside
howled, “Lie down!” and snatched his whip.

They saw the dog’s teeth had slipped the hand, heard a kick, saw the
dog execute a flanking jump and get home on the stranger’s leg, and
heard the rip of his trousering. Then the finer end of Fearenside’s
whip reached his property, and the dog, yelping with dismay, retreated
under the wheels of the waggon. It was all the business of a swift
half-minute. No one spoke, everyone shouted. The stranger glanced
swiftly at his torn glove and at his leg, made as if he would stoop to
the latter, then turned and rushed swiftly up the steps into the inn.
They heard him go headlong across the passage and up the uncarpeted
stairs to his bedroom.

“You brute, you!” said Fearenside, climbing off the waggon with his
whip in his hand, while the dog watched him through the wheel. “Come
here,” said Fearenside—“You’d better.”

Hall had stood gaping. “He wuz bit,” said Hall. “I’d better go and see
to en,” and he trotted after the stranger. He met Mrs. Hall in the
passage. “Carrier’s darg,” he said “bit en.”

He went straight upstairs, and the stranger’s door being ajar, he
pushed it open and was entering without any ceremony, being of a
naturally sympathetic turn of mind.

The blind was down and the room dim. He caught a glimpse of a most
singular thing, what seemed a handless arm waving towards him, and a
face of three huge indeterminate spots on white, very like the face of
a pale pansy. Then he was struck violently in the chest, hurled back,
and the door slammed in his face and locked. It was so rapid that it
gave him no time to observe. A waving of indecipherable shapes, a blow,
and a concussion. There he stood on the dark little landing, wondering
what it might be that he had seen.

A couple of minutes after, he rejoined the little group that had formed
outside the “Coach and Horses.” There was Fearenside telling about it
all over again for the second time; there was Mrs. Hall saying his dog
didn’t have no business to bite her guests; there was Huxter, the
general dealer from over the road, interrogative; and Sandy Wadgers
from the forge, judicial; besides women and children, all of them
saying fatuities: “Wouldn’t let en bite _me_, I knows”; “’Tasn’t right
_have_ such dargs”; “Whad ’_e_ bite ’n for, then?” and so forth.

Mr. Hall, staring at them from the steps and listening, found it
incredible that he had seen anything so very remarkable happen
upstairs. Besides, his vocabulary was altogether too limited to express
his impressions.

“He don’t want no help, he says,” he said in answer to his wife’s
inquiry. “We’d better be a-takin’ of his luggage in.”

“He ought to have it cauterised at once,” said Mr. Huxter; “especially
if it’s at all inflamed.”

“I’d shoot en, that’s what I’d do,” said a lady in the group.

Suddenly the dog began growling again.

“Come along,” cried an angry voice in the doorway, and there stood the
muffled stranger with his collar turned up, and his hat-brim bent down.
“The sooner you get those things in the better I’ll be pleased.” It is
stated by an anonymous bystander that his trousers and gloves had been
changed.

“Was you hurt, sir?” said Fearenside. “I’m rare sorry the darg—”

“Not a bit,” said the stranger. “Never broke the skin. Hurry up with
those things.”

He then swore to himself, so Mr. Hall asserts.

Directly the first crate was, in accordance with his directions,
carried into the parlour, the stranger flung himself upon it with
extraordinary eagerness, and began to unpack it, scattering the straw
with an utter disregard of Mrs. Hall’s carpet. And from it he began to
produce bottles—little fat bottles containing powders, small and
slender bottles containing coloured and white fluids, fluted blue
bottles labeled Poison, bottles with round bodies and slender necks,
large green-glass bottles, large white-glass bottles, bottles with
glass stoppers and frosted labels, bottles with fine corks, bottles
with bungs, bottles with wooden caps, wine bottles, salad-oil
bottles—putting them in rows on the chiffonnier, on the mantel, on the
table under the window, round the floor, on the bookshelf—everywhere.
The chemist’s shop in Bramblehurst could not boast half so many. Quite
a sight it was. Crate after crate yielded bottles, until all six were
empty and the table high with straw; the only things that came out of
these crates besides the bottles were a number of test-tubes and a
carefully packed balance.

And directly the crates were unpacked, the stranger went to the window
and set to work, not troubling in the least about the litter of straw,
the fire which had gone out, the box of books outside, nor for the
trunks and other luggage that had gone upstairs.

When Mrs. Hall took his dinner in to him, he was already so absorbed in
his work, pouring little drops out of the bottles into test-tubes, that
he did not hear her until she had swept away the bulk of the straw and
put the tray on the table, with some little emphasis perhaps, seeing
the state that the floor was in. Then he half turned his head and
immediately turned it away again. But she saw he had removed his
glasses; they were beside him on the table, and it seemed to her that
his eye sockets were extraordinarily hollow. He put on his spectacles
again, and then turned and faced her. She was about to complain of the
straw on the floor when he anticipated her.

“I wish you wouldn’t come in without knocking,” he said in the tone of
abnormal exasperation that seemed so characteristic of him.

“I knocked, but seemingly—”

“Perhaps you did. But in my investigations—my really very urgent and
necessary investigations—the slightest disturbance, the jar of a door—I
must ask you—”

“Certainly, sir. You can turn the lock if you’re like that, you know.
Any time.”

“A very good idea,” said the stranger.

“This stror, sir, if I might make so bold as to remark—”

“Don’t. If the straw makes trouble put it down in the bill.” And he
mumbled at her—words suspiciously like curses.

He was so odd, standing there, so aggressive and explosive, bottle in
one hand and test-tube in the other, that Mrs. Hall was quite alarmed.
But she was a resolute woman. “In which case, I should like to know,
sir, what you consider—”

“A shilling—put down a shilling. Surely a shilling’s enough?”

“So be it,” said Mrs. Hall, taking up the table-cloth and beginning to
spread it over the table. “If you’re satisfied, of course—”

He turned and sat down, with his coat-collar toward her.

All the afternoon he worked with the door locked and, as Mrs. Hall
testifies, for the most part in silence. But once there was a
concussion and a sound of bottles ringing together as though the table
had been hit, and the smash of a bottle flung violently down, and then
a rapid pacing athwart the room. Fearing “something was the matter,”
she went to the door and listened, not caring to knock.

“I can’t go on,” he was raving. “I _can’t_ go on. Three hundred
thousand, four hundred thousand! The huge multitude! Cheated! All my
life it may take me! ... Patience! Patience indeed! ... Fool! fool!”

There was a noise of hobnails on the bricks in the bar, and Mrs. Hall
had very reluctantly to leave the rest of his soliloquy. When she
returned the room was silent again, save for the faint crepitation of
his chair and the occasional clink of a bottle. It was all over; the
stranger had resumed work.

When she took in his tea she saw broken glass in the corner of the room
under the concave mirror, and a golden stain that had been carelessly
wiped. She called attention to it.

“Put it down in the bill,” snapped her visitor. “For God’s sake don’t
worry me. If there’s damage done, put it down in the bill,” and he went
on ticking a list in the exercise book before him.

“I’ll tell you something,” said Fearenside, mysteriously. It was late
in the afternoon, and they were in the little beer-shop of Iping
Hanger.

“Well?” said Teddy Henfrey.

“This chap you’re speaking of, what my dog bit. Well—he’s black.
Leastways, his legs are. I seed through the tear of his trousers and
the tear of his glove. You’d have expected a sort of pinky to show,
wouldn’t you? Well—there wasn’t none. Just blackness. I tell you, he’s
as black as my hat.”

“My sakes!” said Henfrey. “It’s a rummy case altogether. Why, his nose
is as pink as paint!”

“That’s true,” said Fearenside. “I knows that. And I tell ’ee what I’m
thinking. That marn’s a piebald, Teddy. Black here and white there—in
patches. And he’s ashamed of it. He’s a kind of half-breed, and the
colour’s come off patchy instead of mixing. I’ve heard of such things
before. And it’s the common way with horses, as any one can see.”




CHAPTER IV.
MR. CUSS INTERVIEWS THE STRANGER


I have told the circumstances of the stranger’s arrival in Iping with a
certain fulness of detail, in order that the curious impression he
created may be understood by the reader. But excepting two odd
incidents, the circumstances of his stay until the extraordinary day of
the club festival may be passed over very cursorily. There were a
number of skirmishes with Mrs. Hall on matters of domestic discipline,
but in every case until late April, when the first signs of penury
began, he over-rode her by the easy expedient of an extra payment. Hall
did not like him, and whenever he dared he talked of the advisability
of getting rid of him; but he showed his dislike chiefly by concealing
it ostentatiously, and avoiding his visitor as much as possible. “Wait
till the summer,” said Mrs. Hall sagely, “when the artisks are
beginning to come. Then we’ll see. He may be a bit overbearing, but
bills settled punctual is bills settled punctual, whatever you’d like
to say.”

The stranger did not go to church, and indeed made no difference
between Sunday and the irreligious days, even in costume. He worked, as
Mrs. Hall thought, very fitfully. Some days he would come down early
and be continuously busy. On others he would rise late, pace his room,
fretting audibly for hours together, smoke, sleep in the armchair by
the fire. Communication with the world beyond the village he had none.
His temper continued very uncertain; for the most part his manner was
that of a man suffering under almost unendurable provocation, and once
or twice things were snapped, torn, crushed, or broken in spasmodic
gusts of violence. He seemed under a chronic irritation of the greatest
intensity. His habit of talking to himself in a low voice grew steadily
upon him, but though Mrs. Hall listened conscientiously she could make
neither head nor tail of what she heard.

He rarely went abroad by daylight, but at twilight he would go out
muffled up invisibly, whether the weather were cold or not, and he
chose the loneliest paths and those most overshadowed by trees and
banks. His goggling spectacles and ghastly bandaged face under the
penthouse of his hat, came with a disagreeable suddenness out of the
darkness upon one or two home-going labourers, and Teddy Henfrey,
tumbling out of the “Scarlet Coat” one night, at half-past nine, was
scared shamefully by the stranger’s skull-like head (he was walking hat
in hand) lit by the sudden light of the opened inn door. Such children
as saw him at nightfall dreamt of bogies, and it seemed doubtful
whether he disliked boys more than they disliked him, or the reverse;
but there was certainly a vivid enough dislike on either side.

It was inevitable that a person of so remarkable an appearance and
bearing should form a frequent topic in such a village as Iping.
Opinion was greatly divided about his occupation. Mrs. Hall was
sensitive on the point. When questioned, she explained very carefully
that he was an “experimental investigator,” going gingerly over the
syllables as one who dreads pitfalls. When asked what an experimental
investigator was, she would say with a touch of superiority that most
educated people knew such things as that, and would thus explain that
he “discovered things.” Her visitor had had an accident, she said,
which temporarily discoloured his face and hands, and being of a
sensitive disposition, he was averse to any public notice of the fact.

Out of her hearing there was a view largely entertained that he was a
criminal trying to escape from justice by wrapping himself up so as to
conceal himself altogether from the eye of the police. This idea sprang
from the brain of Mr. Teddy Henfrey. No crime of any magnitude dating
from the middle or end of February was known to have occurred.
Elaborated in the imagination of Mr. Gould, the probationary assistant
in the National School, this theory took the form that the stranger was
an Anarchist in disguise, preparing explosives, and he resolved to
undertake such detective operations as his time permitted. These
consisted for the most part in looking very hard at the stranger
whenever they met, or in asking people who had never seen the stranger,
leading questions about him. But he detected nothing.

Another school of opinion followed Mr. Fearenside, and either accepted
the piebald view or some modification of it; as, for instance, Silas
Durgan, who was heard to assert that “if he chooses to show enself at
fairs he’d make his fortune in no time,” and being a bit of a
theologian, compared the stranger to the man with the one talent. Yet
another view explained the entire matter by regarding the stranger as a
harmless lunatic. That had the advantage of accounting for everything
straight away.

Between these main groups there were waverers and compromisers. Sussex
folk have few superstitions, and it was only after the events of early
April that the thought of the supernatural was first whispered in the
village. Even then it was only credited among the women folk.

But whatever they thought of him, people in Iping, on the whole, agreed
in disliking him. His irritability, though it might have been
comprehensible to an urban brain-worker, was an amazing thing to these
quiet Sussex villagers. The frantic gesticulations they surprised now
and then, the headlong pace after nightfall that swept him upon them
round quiet corners, the inhuman bludgeoning of all tentative advances
of curiosity, the taste for twilight that led to the closing of doors,
the pulling down of blinds, the extinction of candles and lamps—who
could agree with such goings on? They drew aside as he passed down the
village, and when he had gone by, young humourists would up with
coat-collars and down with hat-brims, and go pacing nervously after him
in imitation of his occult bearing. There was a song popular at that
time called “The Bogey Man”. Miss Statchell sang it at the schoolroom
concert (in aid of the church lamps), and thereafter whenever one or
two of the villagers were gathered together and the stranger appeared,
a bar or so of this tune, more or less sharp or flat, was whistled in
the midst of them. Also belated little children would call “Bogey Man!”
after him, and make off tremulously elated.

Cuss, the general practitioner, was devoured by curiosity. The bandages
excited his professional interest, the report of the thousand and one
bottles aroused his jealous regard. All through April and May he
coveted an opportunity of talking to the stranger, and at last, towards
Whitsuntide, he could stand it no longer, but hit upon the
subscription-list for a village nurse as an excuse. He was surprised to
find that Mr. Hall did not know his guest’s name. “He give a name,”
said Mrs. Hall—an assertion which was quite unfounded—“but I didn’t
rightly hear it.” She thought it seemed so silly not to know the man’s
name.

Cuss rapped at the parlour door and entered. There was a fairly audible
imprecation from within. “Pardon my intrusion,” said Cuss, and then the
door closed and cut Mrs. Hall off from the rest of the conversation.

She could hear the murmur of voices for the next ten minutes, then a
cry of surprise, a stirring of feet, a chair flung aside, a bark of
laughter, quick steps to the door, and Cuss appeared, his face white,
his eyes staring over his shoulder. He left the door open behind him,
and without looking at her strode across the hall and went down the
steps, and she heard his feet hurrying along the road. He carried his
hat in his hand. She stood behind the door, looking at the open door of
the parlour. Then she heard the stranger laughing quietly, and then his
footsteps came across the room. She could not see his face where she
stood. The parlour door slammed, and the place was silent again.

Cuss went straight up the village to Bunting the vicar. “Am I mad?”
Cuss began abruptly, as he entered the shabby little study. “Do I look
like an insane person?”

“What’s happened?” said the vicar, putting the ammonite on the loose
sheets of his forth-coming sermon.

“That chap at the inn—”

“Well?”

“Give me something to drink,” said Cuss, and he sat down.

When his nerves had been steadied by a glass of cheap sherry—the only
drink the good vicar had available—he told him of the interview he had
just had. “Went in,” he gasped, “and began to demand a subscription for
that Nurse Fund. He’d stuck his hands in his pockets as I came in, and
he sat down lumpily in his chair. Sniffed. I told him I’d heard he took
an interest in scientific things. He said yes. Sniffed again. Kept on
sniffing all the time; evidently recently caught an infernal cold. No
wonder, wrapped up like that! I developed the nurse idea, and all the
while kept my eyes open. Bottles—chemicals—everywhere. Balance,
test-tubes in stands, and a smell of—evening primrose. Would he
subscribe? Said he’d consider it. Asked him, point-blank, was he
researching. Said he was. A long research? Got quite cross. ‘A damnable
long research,’ said he, blowing the cork out, so to speak. ‘Oh,’ said
I. And out came the grievance. The man was just on the boil, and my
question boiled him over. He had been given a prescription, most
valuable prescription—what for he wouldn’t say. Was it medical? ‘Damn
you! What are you fishing after?’ I apologised. Dignified sniff and
cough. He resumed. He’d read it. Five ingredients. Put it down; turned
his head. Draught of air from window lifted the paper. Swish, rustle.
He was working in a room with an open fireplace, he said. Saw a
flicker, and there was the prescription burning and lifting
chimneyward. Rushed towards it just as it whisked up the chimney. So!
Just at that point, to illustrate his story, out came his arm.”

“Well?”

“No hand—just an empty sleeve. Lord! I thought, _that’s_ a deformity!
Got a cork arm, I suppose, and has taken it off. Then, I thought,
there’s something odd in that. What the devil keeps that sleeve up and
open, if there’s nothing in it? There was nothing in it, I tell you.
Nothing down it, right down to the joint. I could see right down it to
the elbow, and there was a glimmer of light shining through a tear of
the cloth. ‘Good God!’ I said. Then he stopped. Stared at me with those
black goggles of his, and then at his sleeve.”

“Well?”

“That’s all. He never said a word; just glared, and put his sleeve back
in his pocket quickly. ‘I was saying,’ said he, ‘that there was the
prescription burning, wasn’t I?’ Interrogative cough. ‘How the devil,’
said I, ‘can you move an empty sleeve like that?’ ‘Empty sleeve?’
‘Yes,’ said I, ‘an empty sleeve.’

“‘It’s an empty sleeve, is it? You saw it was an empty sleeve?’ He
stood up right away. I stood up too. He came towards me in three very
slow steps, and stood quite close. Sniffed venomously. I didn’t flinch,
though I’m hanged if that bandaged knob of his, and those blinkers,
aren’t enough to unnerve any one, coming quietly up to you.

“‘You said it was an empty sleeve?’ he said. ‘Certainly,’ I said. At
staring and saying nothing a barefaced man, unspectacled, starts
scratch. Then very quietly he pulled his sleeve out of his pocket
again, and raised his arm towards me as though he would show it to me
again. He did it very, very slowly. I looked at it. Seemed an age.
‘Well?’ said I, clearing my throat, ‘there’s nothing in it.’

“Had to say something. I was beginning to feel frightened. I could see
right down it. He extended it straight towards me, slowly, slowly—just
like that—until the cuff was six inches from my face. Queer thing to
see an empty sleeve come at you like that! And then—”

“Well?”

“Something—exactly like a finger and thumb it felt—nipped my nose.”

Bunting began to laugh.

“There wasn’t anything there!” said Cuss, his voice running up into a
shriek at the “there.” “It’s all very well for you to laugh, but I tell
you I was so startled, I hit his cuff hard, and turned around, and cut
out of the room—I left him—”

Cuss stopped. There was no mistaking the sincerity of his panic. He
turned round in a helpless way and took a second glass of the excellent
vicar’s very inferior sherry. “When I hit his cuff,” said Cuss, “I tell
you, it felt exactly like hitting an arm. And there wasn’t an arm!
There wasn’t the ghost of an arm!”

Mr. Bunting thought it over. He looked suspiciously at Cuss. “It’s a
most remarkable story,” he said. He looked very wise and grave indeed.
“It’s really,” said Mr. Bunting with judicial emphasis, “a most
remarkable story.”




CHAPTER V.
THE BURGLARY AT THE VICARAGE


The facts of the burglary at the vicarage came to us chiefly through
the medium of the vicar and his wife. It occurred in the small hours of
Whit Monday, the day devoted in Iping to the Club festivities. Mrs.
Bunting, it seems, woke up suddenly in the stillness that comes before
the dawn, with the strong impression that the door of their bedroom had
opened and closed. She did not arouse her husband at first, but sat up
in bed listening. She then distinctly heard the pad, pad, pad of bare
feet coming out of the adjoining dressing-room and walking along the
passage towards the staircase. As soon as she felt assured of this, she
aroused the Rev. Mr. Bunting as quietly as possible. He did not strike
a light, but putting on his spectacles, her dressing-gown and his bath
slippers, he went out on the landing to listen. He heard quite
distinctly a fumbling going on at his study desk down-stairs, and then
a violent sneeze.

At that he returned to his bedroom, armed himself with the most obvious
weapon, the poker, and descended the staircase as noiselessly as
possible. Mrs. Bunting came out on the landing.

The hour was about four, and the ultimate darkness of the night was
past. There was a faint shimmer of light in the hall, but the study
doorway yawned impenetrably black. Everything was still except the
faint creaking of the stairs under Mr. Bunting’s tread, and the slight
movements in the study. Then something snapped, the drawer was opened,
and there was a rustle of papers. Then came an imprecation, and a match
was struck and the study was flooded with yellow light. Mr. Bunting was
now in the hall, and through the crack of the door he could see the
desk and the open drawer and a candle burning on the desk. But the
robber he could not see. He stood there in the hall undecided what to
do, and Mrs. Bunting, her face white and intent, crept slowly
downstairs after him. One thing kept Mr. Bunting’s courage; the
persuasion that this burglar was a resident in the village.

They heard the chink of money, and realised that the robber had found
the housekeeping reserve of gold—two pounds ten in half sovereigns
altogether. At that sound Mr. Bunting was nerved to abrupt action.
Gripping the poker firmly, he rushed into the room, closely followed by
Mrs. Bunting. “Surrender!” cried Mr. Bunting, fiercely, and then
stooped amazed. Apparently the room was perfectly empty.

Yet their conviction that they had, that very moment, heard somebody
moving in the room had amounted to a certainty. For half a minute,
perhaps, they stood gaping, then Mrs. Bunting went across the room and
looked behind the screen, while Mr. Bunting, by a kindred impulse,
peered under the desk. Then Mrs. Bunting turned back the
window-curtains, and Mr. Bunting looked up the chimney and probed it
with the poker. Then Mrs. Bunting scrutinised the waste-paper basket
and Mr. Bunting opened the lid of the coal-scuttle. Then they came to a
stop and stood with eyes interrogating each other.

“I could have sworn—” said Mr. Bunting.

“The candle!” said Mr. Bunting. “Who lit the candle?”

“The drawer!” said Mrs. Bunting. “And the money’s gone!”

She went hastily to the doorway.

“Of all the strange occurrences—”

There was a violent sneeze in the passage. They rushed out, and as they
did so the kitchen door slammed. “Bring the candle,” said Mr. Bunting,
and led the way. They both heard a sound of bolts being hastily shot
back.

As he opened the kitchen door he saw through the scullery that the back
door was just opening, and the faint light of early dawn displayed the
dark masses of the garden beyond. He is certain that nothing went out
of the door. It opened, stood open for a moment, and then closed with a
slam. As it did so, the candle Mrs. Bunting was carrying from the study
flickered and flared. It was a minute or more before they entered the
kitchen.

The place was empty. They refastened the back door, examined the
kitchen, pantry, and scullery thoroughly, and at last went down into
the cellar. There was not a soul to be found in the house, search as
they would.

Daylight found the vicar and his wife, a quaintly-costumed little
couple, still marvelling about on their own ground floor by the
unnecessary light of a guttering candle.




CHAPTER VI.
THE FURNITURE THAT WENT MAD


Now it happened that in the early hours of Whit Monday, before Millie
was hunted out for the day, Mr. Hall and Mrs. Hall both rose and went
noiselessly down into the cellar. Their business there was of a private
nature, and had something to do with the specific gravity of their
beer. They had hardly entered the cellar when Mrs. Hall found she had
forgotten to bring down a bottle of sarsaparilla from their joint-room.
As she was the expert and principal operator in this affair, Hall very
properly went upstairs for it.

On the landing he was surprised to see that the stranger’s door was
ajar. He went on into his own room and found the bottle as he had been
directed.

But returning with the bottle, he noticed that the bolts of the front
door had been shot back, that the door was in fact simply on the latch.
And with a flash of inspiration he connected this with the stranger’s
room upstairs and the suggestions of Mr. Teddy Henfrey. He distinctly
remembered holding the candle while Mrs. Hall shot these bolts
overnight. At the sight he stopped, gaping, then with the bottle still
in his hand went upstairs again. He rapped at the stranger’s door.
There was no answer. He rapped again; then pushed the door wide open
and entered.

It was as he expected. The bed, the room also, was empty. And what was
stranger, even to his heavy intelligence, on the bedroom chair and
along the rail of the bed were scattered the garments, the only
garments so far as he knew, and the bandages of their guest. His big
slouch hat even was cocked jauntily over the bed-post.

As Hall stood there he heard his wife’s voice coming out of the depth
of the cellar, with that rapid telescoping of the syllables and
interrogative cocking up of the final words to a high note, by which
the West Sussex villager is wont to indicate a brisk impatience.
“George! You gart whad a wand?”

At that he turned and hurried down to her. “Janny,” he said, over the
rail of the cellar steps, “’tas the truth what Henfrey sez. ’E’s not in
uz room, ’e en’t. And the front door’s onbolted.”

At first Mrs. Hall did not understand, and as soon as she did she
resolved to see the empty room for herself. Hall, still holding the
bottle, went first. “If ’e en’t there,” he said, “’is close are. And
what’s ’e doin’ ’ithout ’is close, then? ’Tas a most curious business.”

As they came up the cellar steps they both, it was afterwards
ascertained, fancied they heard the front door open and shut, but
seeing it closed and nothing there, neither said a word to the other
about it at the time. Mrs. Hall passed her husband in the passage and
ran on first upstairs. Someone sneezed on the staircase. Hall,
following six steps behind, thought that he heard her sneeze. She,
going on first, was under the impression that Hall was sneezing. She
flung open the door and stood regarding the room. “Of all the curious!”
she said.

She heard a sniff close behind her head as it seemed, and turning, was
surprised to see Hall a dozen feet off on the topmost stair. But in
another moment he was beside her. She bent forward and put her hand on
the pillow and then under the clothes.

“Cold,” she said. “He’s been up this hour or more.”

As she did so, a most extraordinary thing happened. The bed-clothes
gathered themselves together, leapt up suddenly into a sort of peak,
and then jumped headlong over the bottom rail. It was exactly as if a
hand had clutched them in the centre and flung them aside. Immediately
after, the stranger’s hat hopped off the bed-post, described a whirling
flight in the air through the better part of a circle, and then dashed
straight at Mrs. Hall’s face. Then as swiftly came the sponge from the
washstand; and then the chair, flinging the stranger’s coat and
trousers carelessly aside, and laughing drily in a voice singularly
like the stranger’s, turned itself up with its four legs at Mrs. Hall,
seemed to take aim at her for a moment, and charged at her. She
screamed and turned, and then the chair legs came gently but firmly
against her back and impelled her and Hall out of the room. The door
slammed violently and was locked. The chair and bed seemed to be
executing a dance of triumph for a moment, and then abruptly everything
was still.

Mrs. Hall was left almost in a fainting condition in Mr. Hall’s arms on
the landing. It was with the greatest difficulty that Mr. Hall and
Millie, who had been roused by her scream of alarm, succeeded in
getting her downstairs, and applying the restoratives customary in such
cases.

“’Tas sperits,” said Mrs. Hall. “I know ’tas sperits. I’ve read in
papers of en. Tables and chairs leaping and dancing...”

“Take a drop more, Janny,” said Hall. “’Twill steady ye.”

“Lock him out,” said Mrs. Hall. “Don’t let him come in again. I half
guessed—I might ha’ known. With them goggling eyes and bandaged head,
and never going to church of a Sunday. And all they bottles—more’n it’s
right for any one to have. He’s put the sperits into the furniture....
My good old furniture! ’Twas in that very chair my poor dear mother
used to sit when I was a little girl. To think it should rise up
against me now!”

“Just a drop more, Janny,” said Hall. “Your nerves is all upset.”

They sent Millie across the street through the golden five o’clock
sunshine to rouse up Mr. Sandy Wadgers, the blacksmith. Mr. Hall’s
compliments and the furniture upstairs was behaving most extraordinary.
Would Mr. Wadgers come round? He was a knowing man, was Mr. Wadgers,
and very resourceful. He took quite a grave view of the case. “Arm
darmed if thet ent witchcraft,” was the view of Mr. Sandy Wadgers. “You
warnt horseshoes for such gentry as he.”

He came round greatly concerned. They wanted him to lead the way
upstairs to the room, but he didn’t seem to be in any hurry. He
preferred to talk in the passage. Over the way Huxter’s apprentice came
out and began taking down the shutters of the tobacco window. He was
called over to join the discussion. Mr. Huxter naturally followed over
in the course of a few minutes. The Anglo-Saxon genius for
parliamentary government asserted itself; there was a great deal of
talk and no decisive action. “Let’s have the facts first,” insisted Mr.
Sandy Wadgers. “Let’s be sure we’d be acting perfectly right in bustin’
that there door open. A door onbust is always open to bustin’, but ye
can’t onbust a door once you’ve busted en.”

And suddenly and most wonderfully the door of the room upstairs opened
of its own accord, and as they looked up in amazement, they saw
descending the stairs the muffled figure of the stranger staring more
blackly and blankly than ever with those unreasonably large blue glass
eyes of his. He came down stiffly and slowly, staring all the time; he
walked across the passage staring, then stopped.

“Look there!” he said, and their eyes followed the direction of his
gloved finger and saw a bottle of sarsaparilla hard by the cellar door.
Then he entered the parlour, and suddenly, swiftly, viciously, slammed
the door in their faces.

Not a word was spoken until the last echoes of the slam had died away.
They stared at one another. “Well, if that don’t lick everything!” said
Mr. Wadgers, and left the alternative unsaid.

“I’d go in and ask’n ’bout it,” said Wadgers, to Mr. Hall. “I’d d’mand
an explanation.”

It took some time to bring the landlady’s husband up to that pitch. At
last he rapped, opened the door, and got as far as, “Excuse me—”

“Go to the devil!” said the stranger in a tremendous voice, and “Shut
that door after you.” So that brief interview terminated.




CHAPTER VII.
THE UNVEILING OF THE STRANGER


The stranger went into the little parlour of the “Coach and Horses”
about half-past five in the morning, and there he remained until near
midday, the blinds down, the door shut, and none, after Hall’s repulse,
venturing near him.

All that time he must have fasted. Thrice he rang his bell, the third
time furiously and continuously, but no one answered him. “Him and his
‘go to the devil’ indeed!” said Mrs. Hall. Presently came an imperfect
rumour of the burglary at the vicarage, and two and two were put
together. Hall, assisted by Wadgers, went off to find Mr. Shuckleforth,
the magistrate, and take his advice. No one ventured upstairs. How the
stranger occupied himself is unknown. Now and then he would stride
violently up and down, and twice came an outburst of curses, a tearing
of paper, and a violent smashing of bottles.

The little group of scared but curious people increased. Mrs. Huxter
came over; some gay young fellows resplendent in black ready-made
jackets and _piqué_ paper ties—for it was Whit Monday—joined the group
with confused interrogations. Young Archie Harker distinguished himself
by going up the yard and trying to peep under the window-blinds. He
could see nothing, but gave reason for supposing that he did, and
others of the Iping youth presently joined him.

It was the finest of all possible Whit Mondays, and down the village
street stood a row of nearly a dozen booths, a shooting gallery, and on
the grass by the forge were three yellow and chocolate waggons and some
picturesque strangers of both sexes putting up a cocoanut shy. The
gentlemen wore blue jerseys, the ladies white aprons and quite
fashionable hats with heavy plumes. Wodger, of the “Purple Fawn,” and
Mr. Jaggers, the cobbler, who also sold old second-hand ordinary
bicycles, were stretching a string of union-jacks and royal ensigns
(which had originally celebrated the first Victorian Jubilee) across
the road.

And inside, in the artificial darkness of the parlour, into which only
one thin jet of sunlight penetrated, the stranger, hungry we must
suppose, and fearful, hidden in his uncomfortable hot wrappings, pored
through his dark glasses upon his paper or chinked his dirty little
bottles, and occasionally swore savagely at the boys, audible if
invisible, outside the windows. In the corner by the fireplace lay the
fragments of half a dozen smashed bottles, and a pungent twang of
chlorine tainted the air. So much we know from what was heard at the
time and from what was subsequently seen in the room.

About noon he suddenly opened his parlour door and stood glaring
fixedly at the three or four people in the bar. “Mrs. Hall,” he said.
Somebody went sheepishly and called for Mrs. Hall.

Mrs. Hall appeared after an interval, a little short of breath, but all
the fiercer for that. Hall was still out. She had deliberated over this
scene, and she came holding a little tray with an unsettled bill upon
it. “Is it your bill you’re wanting, sir?” she said.

“Why wasn’t my breakfast laid? Why haven’t you prepared my meals and
answered my bell? Do you think I live without eating?”

“Why isn’t my bill paid?” said Mrs. Hall. “That’s what I want to know.”

“I told you three days ago I was awaiting a remittance—”

“I told you two days ago I wasn’t going to await no remittances. You
can’t grumble if your breakfast waits a bit, if my bill’s been waiting
these five days, can you?”

The stranger swore briefly but vividly.

“Nar, nar!” from the bar.

“And I’d thank you kindly, sir, if you’d keep your swearing to
yourself, sir,” said Mrs. Hall.

The stranger stood looking more like an angry diving-helmet than ever.
It was universally felt in the bar that Mrs. Hall had the better of
him. His next words showed as much.

“Look here, my good woman—” he began.

“Don’t ‘good woman’ _me_,” said Mrs. Hall.

“I’ve told you my remittance hasn’t come.”

“Remittance indeed!” said Mrs. Hall.

“Still, I daresay in my pocket—”

“You told me three days ago that you hadn’t anything but a sovereign’s
worth of silver upon you.”

“Well, I’ve found some more—”

“’Ul-lo!” from the bar.

“I wonder where you found it,” said Mrs. Hall.

That seemed to annoy the stranger very much. He stamped his foot. “What
do you mean?” he said.

“That I wonder where you found it,” said Mrs. Hall. “And before I take
any bills or get any breakfasts, or do any such things whatsoever, you
got to tell me one or two things I don’t understand, and what nobody
don’t understand, and what everybody is very anxious to understand. I
want to know what you been doing t’my chair upstairs, and I want to
know how ’tis your room was empty, and how you got in again. Them as
stops in this house comes in by the doors—that’s the rule of the house,
and that you _didn’t_ do, and what I want to know is how you _did_ come
in. And I want to know—”

Suddenly the stranger raised his gloved hands clenched, stamped his
foot, and said, “Stop!” with such extraordinary violence that he
silenced her instantly.

“You don’t understand,” he said, “who I am or what I am. I’ll show you.
By Heaven! I’ll show you.” Then he put his open palm over his face and
withdrew it. The centre of his face became a black cavity. “Here,” he
said. He stepped forward and handed Mrs. Hall something which she,
staring at his metamorphosed face, accepted automatically. Then, when
she saw what it was, she screamed loudly, dropped it, and staggered
back. The nose—it was the stranger’s nose! pink and shining—rolled on
the floor.

Then he removed his spectacles, and everyone in the bar gasped. He took
off his hat, and with a violent gesture tore at his whiskers and
bandages. For a moment they resisted him. A flash of horrible
anticipation passed through the bar. “Oh, my Gard!” said some one. Then
off they came.

It was worse than anything. Mrs. Hall, standing open-mouthed and
horror-struck, shrieked at what she saw, and made for the door of the
house. Everyone began to move. They were prepared for scars,
disfigurements, tangible horrors, but nothing! The bandages and false
hair flew across the passage into the bar, making a hobbledehoy jump to
avoid them. Everyone tumbled on everyone else down the steps. For the
man who stood there shouting some incoherent explanation, was a solid
gesticulating figure up to the coat-collar of him, and
then—nothingness, no visible thing at all!

People down the village heard shouts and shrieks, and looking up the
street saw the “Coach and Horses” violently firing out its humanity.
They saw Mrs. Hall fall down and Mr. Teddy Henfrey jump to avoid
tumbling over her, and then they heard the frightful screams of Millie,
who, emerging suddenly from the kitchen at the noise of the tumult, had
come upon the headless stranger from behind. These increased suddenly.

Forthwith everyone all down the street, the sweetstuff seller, cocoanut
shy proprietor and his assistant, the swing man, little boys and girls,
rustic dandies, smart wenches, smocked elders and aproned gipsies—began
running towards the inn, and in a miraculously short space of time a
crowd of perhaps forty people, and rapidly increasing, swayed and
hooted and inquired and exclaimed and suggested, in front of Mrs.
Hall’s establishment. Everyone seemed eager to talk at once, and the
result was Babel. A small group supported Mrs. Hall, who was picked up
in a state of collapse. There was a conference, and the incredible
evidence of a vociferous eye-witness. “O Bogey!” “What’s he been doin’,
then?” “Ain’t hurt the girl, ’as ’e?” “Run at en with a knife, I
believe.” “No ’ed, I tell ye. I don’t mean no manner of speaking. I
mean _marn ’ithout a ’ed_!” “Narnsense! ’tis some conjuring trick.”
“Fetched off ’is wrapping, ’e did—”

In its struggles to see in through the open door, the crowd formed
itself into a straggling wedge, with the more adventurous apex nearest
the inn. “He stood for a moment, I heerd the gal scream, and he turned.
I saw her skirts whisk, and he went after her. Didn’t take ten seconds.
Back he comes with a knife in uz hand and a loaf; stood just as if he
was staring. Not a moment ago. Went in that there door. I tell ’e, ’e
ain’t gart no ’ed at all. You just missed en—”

There was a disturbance behind, and the speaker stopped to step aside
for a little procession that was marching very resolutely towards the
house; first Mr. Hall, very red and determined, then Mr. Bobby Jaffers,
the village constable, and then the wary Mr. Wadgers. They had come now
armed with a warrant.

People shouted conflicting information of the recent circumstances.
“’Ed or no ’ed,” said Jaffers, “I got to ’rest en, and ’rest en I
_will_.”

Mr. Hall marched up the steps, marched straight to the door of the
parlour and flung it open. “Constable,” he said, “do your duty.”

Jaffers marched in. Hall next, Wadgers last. They saw in the dim light
the headless figure facing them, with a gnawed crust of bread in one
gloved hand and a chunk of cheese in the other.

“That’s him!” said Hall.

“What the devil’s this?” came in a tone of angry expostulation from
above the collar of the figure.

“You’re a damned rum customer, mister,” said Mr. Jaffers. “But ’ed or
no ’ed, the warrant says ‘body,’ and duty’s duty—”

“Keep off!” said the figure, starting back.

Abruptly he whipped down the bread and cheese, and Mr. Hall just
grasped the knife on the table in time to save it. Off came the
stranger’s left glove and was slapped in Jaffers’ face. In another
moment Jaffers, cutting short some statement concerning a warrant, had
gripped him by the handless wrist and caught his invisible throat. He
got a sounding kick on the shin that made him shout, but he kept his
grip. Hall sent the knife sliding along the table to Wadgers, who acted
as goal-keeper for the offensive, so to speak, and then stepped forward
as Jaffers and the stranger swayed and staggered towards him, clutching
and hitting in. A chair stood in the way, and went aside with a crash
as they came down together.

“Get the feet,” said Jaffers between his teeth.

Mr. Hall, endeavouring to act on instructions, received a sounding kick
in the ribs that disposed of him for a moment, and Mr. Wadgers, seeing
the decapitated stranger had rolled over and got the upper side of
Jaffers, retreated towards the door, knife in hand, and so collided
with Mr. Huxter and the Sidderbridge carter coming to the rescue of law
and order. At the same moment down came three or four bottles from the
chiffonnier and shot a web of pungency into the air of the room.

“I’ll surrender,” cried the stranger, though he had Jaffers down, and
in another moment he stood up panting, a strange figure, headless and
handless—for he had pulled off his right glove now as well as his left.
“It’s no good,” he said, as if sobbing for breath.

It was the strangest thing in the world to hear that voice coming as if
out of empty space, but the Sussex peasants are perhaps the most
matter-of-fact people under the sun. Jaffers got up also and produced a
pair of handcuffs. Then he stared.

“I say!” said Jaffers, brought up short by a dim realization of the
incongruity of the whole business, “Darn it! Can’t use ’em as I can
see.”

The stranger ran his arm down his waistcoat, and as if by a miracle the
buttons to which his empty sleeve pointed became undone. Then he said
something about his shin, and stooped down. He seemed to be fumbling
with his shoes and socks.

“Why!” said Huxter, suddenly, “that’s not a man at all. It’s just empty
clothes. Look! You can see down his collar and the linings of his
clothes. I could put my arm—”

He extended his hand; it seemed to meet something in mid-air, and he
drew it back with a sharp exclamation. “I wish you’d keep your fingers
out of my eye,” said the aerial voice, in a tone of savage
expostulation. “The fact is, I’m all here—head, hands, legs, and all
the rest of it, but it happens I’m invisible. It’s a confounded
nuisance, but I am. That’s no reason why I should be poked to pieces by
every stupid bumpkin in Iping, is it?”

The suit of clothes, now all unbuttoned and hanging loosely upon its
unseen supports, stood up, arms akimbo.

Several other of the men folks had now entered the room, so that it was
closely crowded. “Invisible, eh?” said Huxter, ignoring the stranger’s
abuse. “Who ever heard the likes of that?”

“It’s strange, perhaps, but it’s not a crime. Why am I assaulted by a
policeman in this fashion?”

“Ah! that’s a different matter,” said Jaffers. “No doubt you are a bit
difficult to see in this light, but I got a warrant and it’s all
correct. What I’m after ain’t no invisibility,—it’s burglary. There’s a
house been broke into and money took.”

“Well?”

“And circumstances certainly point—”

“Stuff and nonsense!” said the Invisible Man.

“I hope so, sir; but I’ve got my instructions.”

“Well,” said the stranger, “I’ll come. I’ll _come_. But no handcuffs.”

“It’s the regular thing,” said Jaffers.

“No handcuffs,” stipulated the stranger.

“Pardon me,” said Jaffers.

Abruptly the figure sat down, and before any one could realise was was
being done, the slippers, socks, and trousers had been kicked off under
the table. Then he sprang up again and flung off his coat.

“Here, stop that,” said Jaffers, suddenly realising what was happening.
He gripped at the waistcoat; it struggled, and the shirt slipped out of
it and left it limp and empty in his hand. “Hold him!” said Jaffers,
loudly. “Once he gets the things off—”

“Hold him!” cried everyone, and there was a rush at the fluttering
white shirt which was now all that was visible of the stranger.

The shirt-sleeve planted a shrewd blow in Hall’s face that stopped his
open-armed advance, and sent him backward into old Toothsome the
sexton, and in another moment the garment was lifted up and became
convulsed and vacantly flapping about the arms, even as a shirt that is
being thrust over a man’s head. Jaffers clutched at it, and only helped
to pull it off; he was struck in the mouth out of the air, and
incontinently threw his truncheon and smote Teddy Henfrey savagely upon
the crown of his head.

“Look out!” said everybody, fencing at random and hitting at nothing.
“Hold him! Shut the door! Don’t let him loose! I got something! Here he
is!” A perfect Babel of noises they made. Everybody, it seemed, was
being hit all at once, and Sandy Wadgers, knowing as ever and his wits
sharpened by a frightful blow in the nose, reopened the door and led
the rout. The others, following incontinently, were jammed for a moment
in the corner by the doorway. The hitting continued. Phipps, the
Unitarian, had a front tooth broken, and Henfrey was injured in the
cartilage of his ear. Jaffers was struck under the jaw, and, turning,
caught at something that intervened between him and Huxter in the
mêlée, and prevented their coming together. He felt a muscular chest,
and in another moment the whole mass of struggling, excited men shot
out into the crowded hall.

“I got him!” shouted Jaffers, choking and reeling through them all, and
wrestling with purple face and swelling veins against his unseen enemy.

Men staggered right and left as the extraordinary conflict swayed
swiftly towards the house door, and went spinning down the half-dozen
steps of the inn. Jaffers cried in a strangled voice—holding tight,
nevertheless, and making play with his knee—spun around, and fell
heavily undermost with his head on the gravel. Only then did his
fingers relax.

There were excited cries of “Hold him!” “Invisible!” and so forth, and
a young fellow, a stranger in the place whose name did not come to
light, rushed in at once, caught something, missed his hold, and fell
over the constable’s prostrate body. Half-way across the road a woman
screamed as something pushed by her; a dog, kicked apparently, yelped
and ran howling into Huxter’s yard, and with that the transit of the
Invisible Man was accomplished. For a space people stood amazed and
gesticulating, and then came panic, and scattered them abroad through
the village as a gust scatters dead leaves.

But Jaffers lay quite still, face upward and knees bent, at the foot of
the steps of the inn.




CHAPTER VIII.
IN TRANSIT


The eighth chapter is exceedingly brief, and relates that Gibbons, the
amateur naturalist of the district, while lying out on the spacious
open downs without a soul within a couple of miles of him, as he
thought, and almost dozing, heard close to him the sound as of a man
coughing, sneezing, and then swearing savagely to himself; and looking,
beheld nothing. Yet the voice was indisputable. It continued to swear
with that breadth and variety that distinguishes the swearing of a
cultivated man. It grew to a climax, diminished again, and died away in
the distance, going as it seemed to him in the direction of Adderdean.
It lifted to a spasmodic sneeze and ended. Gibbons had heard nothing of
the morning’s occurrences, but the phenomenon was so striking and
disturbing that his philosophical tranquillity vanished; he got up
hastily, and hurried down the steepness of the hill towards the
village, as fast as he could go.




CHAPTER IX.
MR. THOMAS MARVEL


You must picture Mr. Thomas Marvel as a person of copious, flexible
visage, a nose of cylindrical protrusion, a liquorish, ample,
fluctuating mouth, and a beard of bristling eccentricity. His figure
inclined to embonpoint; his short limbs accentuated this inclination.
He wore a furry silk hat, and the frequent substitution of twine and
shoe-laces for buttons, apparent at critical points of his costume,
marked a man essentially bachelor.

Mr. Thomas Marvel was sitting with his feet in a ditch by the roadside
over the down towards Adderdean, about a mile and a half out of Iping.
His feet, save for socks of irregular open-work, were bare, his big
toes were broad, and pricked like the ears of a watchful dog. In a
leisurely manner—he did everything in a leisurely manner—he was
contemplating trying on a pair of boots. They were the soundest boots
he had come across for a long time, but too large for him; whereas the
ones he had were, in dry weather, a very comfortable fit, but too
thin-soled for damp. Mr. Thomas Marvel hated roomy shoes, but then he
hated damp. He had never properly thought out which he hated most, and
it was a pleasant day, and there was nothing better to do. So he put
the four shoes in a graceful group on the turf and looked at them. And
seeing them there among the grass and springing agrimony, it suddenly
occurred to him that both pairs were exceedingly ugly to see. He was
not at all startled by a voice behind him.

“They’re boots, anyhow,” said the Voice.

“They are—charity boots,” said Mr. Thomas Marvel, with his head on one
side regarding them distastefully; “and which is the ugliest pair in
the whole blessed universe, I’m darned if I know!”

“H’m,” said the Voice.

“I’ve worn worse—in fact, I’ve worn none. But none so owdacious ugly—if
you’ll allow the expression. I’ve been cadging boots—in particular—for
days. Because I was sick of _them_. They’re sound enough, of course.
But a gentleman on tramp sees such a thundering lot of his boots. And
if you’ll believe me, I’ve raised nothing in the whole blessed country,
try as I would, but _them_. Look at ’em! And a good country for boots,
too, in a general way. But it’s just my promiscuous luck. I’ve got my
boots in this country ten years or more. And then they treat you like
this.”

“It’s a beast of a country,” said the Voice. “And pigs for people.”

“Ain’t it?” said Mr. Thomas Marvel. “Lord! But them boots! It beats
it.”

He turned his head over his shoulder to the right, to look at the boots
of his interlocutor with a view to comparisons, and lo! where the boots
of his interlocutor should have been were neither legs nor boots. He
was irradiated by the dawn of a great amazement. “Where _are_ yer?”
said Mr. Thomas Marvel over his shoulder and coming on all fours. He
saw a stretch of empty downs with the wind swaying the remote
green-pointed furze bushes.

“Am I drunk?” said Mr. Marvel. “Have I had visions? Was I talking to
myself? What the—”

“Don’t be alarmed,” said a Voice.

“None of your ventriloquising _me_,” said Mr. Thomas Marvel, rising
sharply to his feet. “Where _are_ yer? Alarmed, indeed!”

“Don’t be alarmed,” repeated the Voice.

“_You’ll_ be alarmed in a minute, you silly fool,” said Mr. Thomas
Marvel. “Where _are_ yer? Lemme get my mark on yer...

“Are yer _buried_?” said Mr. Thomas Marvel, after an interval.

There was no answer. Mr. Thomas Marvel stood bootless and amazed, his
jacket nearly thrown off.

“Peewit,” said a peewit, very remote.

“Peewit, indeed!” said Mr. Thomas Marvel. “This ain’t no time for
foolery.” The down was desolate, east and west, north and south; the
road with its shallow ditches and white bordering stakes, ran smooth
and empty north and south, and, save for that peewit, the blue sky was
empty too. “So help me,” said Mr. Thomas Marvel, shuffling his coat on
to his shoulders again. “It’s the drink! I might ha’ known.”

“It’s not the drink,” said the Voice. “You keep your nerves steady.”

“Ow!” said Mr. Marvel, and his face grew white amidst its patches.
“It’s the drink!” his lips repeated noiselessly. He remained staring
about him, rotating slowly backwards. “I could have _swore_ I heard a
voice,” he whispered.

“Of course you did.”

“It’s there again,” said Mr. Marvel, closing his eyes and clasping his
hand on his brow with a tragic gesture. He was suddenly taken by the
collar and shaken violently, and left more dazed than ever. “Don’t be a
fool,” said the Voice.

“I’m—off—my—blooming—chump,” said Mr. Marvel. “It’s no good. It’s
fretting about them blarsted boots. I’m off my blessed blooming chump.
Or it’s spirits.”

“Neither one thing nor the other,” said the Voice. “Listen!”

“Chump,” said Mr. Marvel.

“One minute,” said the Voice, penetratingly, tremulous with
self-control.

“Well?” said Mr. Thomas Marvel, with a strange feeling of having been
dug in the chest by a finger.

“You think I’m just imagination? Just imagination?”

“What else _can_ you be?” said Mr. Thomas Marvel, rubbing the back of
his neck.

“Very well,” said the Voice, in a tone of relief. “Then I’m going to
throw flints at you till you think differently.”

“But where _are_ yer?”

The Voice made no answer. Whizz came a flint, apparently out of the
air, and missed Mr. Marvel’s shoulder by a hair’s-breadth. Mr. Marvel,
turning, saw a flint jerk up into the air, trace a complicated path,
hang for a moment, and then fling at his feet with almost invisible
rapidity. He was too amazed to dodge. Whizz it came, and ricochetted
from a bare toe into the ditch. Mr. Thomas Marvel jumped a foot and
howled aloud. Then he started to run, tripped over an unseen obstacle,
and came head over heels into a sitting position.

“_Now_,” said the Voice, as a third stone curved upward and hung in the
air above the tramp. “Am I imagination?”

Mr. Marvel by way of reply struggled to his feet, and was immediately
rolled over again. He lay quiet for a moment. “If you struggle any
more,” said the Voice, “I shall throw the flint at your head.”

“It’s a fair do,” said Mr. Thomas Marvel, sitting up, taking his
wounded toe in hand and fixing his eye on the third missile. “I don’t
understand it. Stones flinging themselves. Stones talking. Put yourself
down. Rot away. I’m done.”

The third flint fell.

“It’s very simple,” said the Voice. “I’m an invisible man.”

“Tell us something I don’t know,” said Mr. Marvel, gasping with pain.
“Where you’ve hid—how you do it—I _don’t_ know. I’m beat.”

“That’s all,” said the Voice. “I’m invisible. That’s what I want you to
understand.”

“Anyone could see that. There is no need for you to be so confounded
impatient, mister. _Now_ then. Give us a notion. How are you hid?”

“I’m invisible. That’s the great point. And what I want you to
understand is this—”

“But whereabouts?” interrupted Mr. Marvel.

“Here! Six yards in front of you.”

“Oh, _come_! I ain’t blind. You’ll be telling me next you’re just thin
air. I’m not one of your ignorant tramps—”

“Yes, I am—thin air. You’re looking through me.”

“What! Ain’t there any stuff to you. _Vox et_—what is it?—jabber. Is it
that?”

“I am just a human being—solid, needing food and drink, needing
covering too—But I’m invisible. You see? Invisible. Simple idea.
Invisible.”

“What, real like?”

“Yes, real.”

“Let’s have a hand of you,” said Marvel, “if you _are_ real. It won’t
be so darn out-of-the-way like, then—_Lord_!” he said, “how you made me
jump!—gripping me like that!”

He felt the hand that had closed round his wrist with his disengaged
fingers, and his fingers went timorously up the arm, patted a muscular
chest, and explored a bearded face. Marvel’s face was astonishment.

“I’m dashed!” he said. “If this don’t beat cock-fighting! Most
remarkable!—And there I can see a rabbit clean through you, ’arf a mile
away! Not a bit of you visible—except—”

He scrutinised the apparently empty space keenly. “You ’aven’t been
eatin’ bread and cheese?” he asked, holding the invisible arm.

“You’re quite right, and it’s not quite assimilated into the system.”

“Ah!” said Mr. Marvel. “Sort of ghostly, though.”

“Of course, all this isn’t half so wonderful as you think.”

“It’s quite wonderful enough for _my_ modest wants,” said Mr. Thomas
Marvel. “Howjer manage it! How the dooce is it done?”

“It’s too long a story. And besides—”

“I tell you, the whole business fairly beats me,” said Mr. Marvel.

“What I want to say at present is this: I need help. I have come to
that—I came upon you suddenly. I was wandering, mad with rage, naked,
impotent. I could have murdered. And I saw you—”

“_Lord_!” said Mr. Marvel.

“I came up behind you—hesitated—went on—”

Mr. Marvel’s expression was eloquent.

“—then stopped. ‘Here,’ I said, ‘is an outcast like myself. This is the
man for me.’ So I turned back and came to you—you. And—”

“_Lord_!” said Mr. Marvel. “But I’m all in a tizzy. May I ask—How is
it? And what you may be requiring in the way of help?—Invisible!”

“I want you to help me get clothes—and shelter—and then, with other
things. I’ve left them long enough. If you won’t—well! But you
_will—must_.”

“Look here,” said Mr. Marvel. “I’m too flabbergasted. Don’t knock me
about any more. And leave me go. I must get steady a bit. And you’ve
pretty near broken my toe. It’s all so unreasonable. Empty downs, empty
sky. Nothing visible for miles except the bosom of Nature. And then
comes a voice. A voice out of heaven! And stones! And a fist—Lord!”

“Pull yourself together,” said the Voice, “for you have to do the job
I’ve chosen for you.”

Mr. Marvel blew out his cheeks, and his eyes were round.

“I’ve chosen you,” said the Voice. “You are the only man except some of
those fools down there, who knows there is such a thing as an invisible
man. You have to be my helper. Help me—and I will do great things for
you. An invisible man is a man of power.” He stopped for a moment to
sneeze violently.

“But if you betray me,” he said, “if you fail to do as I direct you—”
He paused and tapped Mr. Marvel’s shoulder smartly. Mr. Marvel gave a
yelp of terror at the touch. “I don’t want to betray you,” said Mr.
Marvel, edging away from the direction of the fingers. “Don’t you go
a-thinking that, whatever you do. All I want to do is to help you—just
tell me what I got to do. (Lord!) Whatever you want done, that I’m most
willing to do.”




CHAPTER X.
MR. MARVEL’S VISIT TO IPING


After the first gusty panic had spent itself Iping became
argumentative. Scepticism suddenly reared its head—rather nervous
scepticism, not at all assured of its back, but scepticism
nevertheless. It is so much easier not to believe in an invisible man;
and those who had actually seen him dissolve into air, or felt the
strength of his arm, could be counted on the fingers of two hands. And
of these witnesses Mr. Wadgers was presently missing, having retired
impregnably behind the bolts and bars of his own house, and Jaffers was
lying stunned in the parlour of the “Coach and Horses.” Great and
strange ideas transcending experience often have less effect upon men
and women than smaller, more tangible considerations. Iping was gay
with bunting, and everybody was in gala dress. Whit Monday had been
looked forward to for a month or more. By the afternoon even those who
believed in the Unseen were beginning to resume their little amusements
in a tentative fashion, on the supposition that he had quite gone away,
and with the sceptics he was already a jest. But people, sceptics and
believers alike, were remarkably sociable all that day.

Haysman’s meadow was gay with a tent, in which Mrs. Bunting and other
ladies were preparing tea, while, without, the Sunday-school children
ran races and played games under the noisy guidance of the curate and
the Misses Cuss and Sackbut. No doubt there was a slight uneasiness in
the air, but people for the most part had the sense to conceal whatever
imaginative qualms they experienced. On the village green an inclined
strong [rope?], down which, clinging the while to a pulley-swung
handle, one could be hurled violently against a sack at the other end,
came in for considerable favour among the adolescents, as also did the
swings and the cocoanut shies. There was also promenading, and the
steam organ attached to a small roundabout filled the air with a
pungent flavour of oil and with equally pungent music. Members of the
club, who had attended church in the morning, were splendid in badges
of pink and green, and some of the gayer-minded had also adorned their
bowler hats with brilliant-coloured favours of ribbon. Old Fletcher,
whose conceptions of holiday-making were severe, was visible through
the jasmine about his window or through the open door (whichever way
you chose to look), poised delicately on a plank supported on two
chairs, and whitewashing the ceiling of his front room.

About four o’clock a stranger entered the village from the direction of
the downs. He was a short, stout person in an extraordinarily shabby
top hat, and he appeared to be very much out of breath. His cheeks were
alternately limp and tightly puffed. His mottled face was apprehensive,
and he moved with a sort of reluctant alacrity. He turned the corner of
the church, and directed his way to the “Coach and Horses.” Among
others old Fletcher remembers seeing him, and indeed the old gentleman
was so struck by his peculiar agitation that he inadvertently allowed a
quantity of whitewash to run down the brush into the sleeve of his coat
while regarding him.

This stranger, to the perceptions of the proprietor of the cocoanut
shy, appeared to be talking to himself, and Mr. Huxter remarked the
same thing. He stopped at the foot of the “Coach and Horses” steps,
and, according to Mr. Huxter, appeared to undergo a severe internal
struggle before he could induce himself to enter the house. Finally he
marched up the steps, and was seen by Mr. Huxter to turn to the left
and open the door of the parlour. Mr. Huxter heard voices from within
the room and from the bar apprising the man of his error. “That room’s
private!” said Hall, and the stranger shut the door clumsily and went
into the bar.

In the course of a few minutes he reappeared, wiping his lips with the
back of his hand with an air of quiet satisfaction that somehow
impressed Mr. Huxter as assumed. He stood looking about him for some
moments, and then Mr. Huxter saw him walk in an oddly furtive manner
towards the gates of the yard, upon which the parlour window opened.
The stranger, after some hesitation, leant against one of the
gate-posts, produced a short clay pipe, and prepared to fill it. His
fingers trembled while doing so. He lit it clumsily, and folding his
arms began to smoke in a languid attitude, an attitude which his
occasional glances up the yard altogether belied.

All this Mr. Huxter saw over the canisters of the tobacco window, and
the singularity of the man’s behaviour prompted him to maintain his
observation.

Presently the stranger stood up abruptly and put his pipe in his
pocket. Then he vanished into the yard. Forthwith Mr. Huxter,
conceiving he was witness of some petty larceny, leapt round his
counter and ran out into the road to intercept the thief. As he did so,
Mr. Marvel reappeared, his hat askew, a big bundle in a blue
table-cloth in one hand, and three books tied together—as it proved
afterwards with the Vicar’s braces—in the other. Directly he saw Huxter
he gave a sort of gasp, and turning sharply to the left, began to run.
“Stop, thief!” cried Huxter, and set off after him. Mr. Huxter’s
sensations were vivid but brief. He saw the man just before him and
spurting briskly for the church corner and the hill road. He saw the
village flags and festivities beyond, and a face or so turned towards
him. He bawled, “Stop!” again. He had hardly gone ten strides before
his shin was caught in some mysterious fashion, and he was no longer
running, but flying with inconceivable rapidity through the air. He saw
the ground suddenly close to his face. The world seemed to splash into
a million whirling specks of light, and subsequent proceedings
interested him no more.




CHAPTER XI.
IN THE “COACH AND HORSES”


Now in order clearly to understand what had happened in the inn, it is
necessary to go back to the moment when Mr. Marvel first came into view
of Mr. Huxter’s window.

At that precise moment Mr. Cuss and Mr. Bunting were in the parlour.
They were seriously investigating the strange occurrences of the
morning, and were, with Mr. Hall’s permission, making a thorough
examination of the Invisible Man’s belongings. Jaffers had partially
recovered from his fall and had gone home in the charge of his
sympathetic friends. The stranger’s scattered garments had been removed
by Mrs. Hall and the room tidied up. And on the table under the window
where the stranger had been wont to work, Cuss had hit almost at once
on three big books in manuscript labelled “Diary.”

“Diary!” said Cuss, putting the three books on the table. “Now, at any
rate, we shall learn something.” The Vicar stood with his hands on the
table.

“Diary,” repeated Cuss, sitting down, putting two volumes to support
the third, and opening it. “H’m—no name on the fly-leaf.
Bother!—cypher. And figures.”

The vicar came round to look over his shoulder.

Cuss turned the pages over with a face suddenly disappointed. “I’m—dear
me! It’s all cypher, Bunting.”

“There are no diagrams?” asked Mr. Bunting. “No illustrations throwing
light—”

“See for yourself,” said Mr. Cuss. “Some of it’s mathematical and some
of it’s Russian or some such language (to judge by the letters), and
some of it’s Greek. Now the Greek I thought _you_—”

“Of course,” said Mr. Bunting, taking out and wiping his spectacles and
feeling suddenly very uncomfortable—for he had no Greek left in his
mind worth talking about; “yes—the Greek, of course, may furnish a
clue.”

“I’ll find you a place.”

“I’d rather glance through the volumes first,” said Mr. Bunting, still
wiping. “A general impression first, Cuss, and _then_, you know, we can
go looking for clues.”

He coughed, put on his glasses, arranged them fastidiously, coughed
again, and wished something would happen to avert the seemingly
inevitable exposure. Then he took the volume Cuss handed him in a
leisurely manner. And then something did happen.

The door opened suddenly.

Both gentlemen started violently, looked round, and were relieved to
see a sporadically rosy face beneath a furry silk hat. “Tap?” asked the
face, and stood staring.

“No,” said both gentlemen at once.

“Over the other side, my man,” said Mr. Bunting. And “Please shut that
door,” said Mr. Cuss, irritably.

“All right,” said the intruder, as it seemed in a low voice curiously
different from the huskiness of its first inquiry. “Right you are,”
said the intruder in the former voice. “Stand clear!” and he vanished
and closed the door.

“A sailor, I should judge,” said Mr. Bunting. “Amusing fellows, they
are. Stand clear! indeed. A nautical term, referring to his getting
back out of the room, I suppose.”

“I daresay so,” said Cuss. “My nerves are all loose to-day. It quite
made me jump—the door opening like that.”

Mr. Bunting smiled as if he had not jumped. “And now,” he said with a
sigh, “these books.”

Someone sniffed as he did so.

“One thing is indisputable,” said Bunting, drawing up a chair next to
that of Cuss. “There certainly have been very strange things happen in
Iping during the last few days—very strange. I cannot of course believe
in this absurd invisibility story—”

“It’s incredible,” said Cuss—“incredible. But the fact remains that I
saw—I certainly saw right down his sleeve—”

“But did you—are you sure? Suppose a mirror, for instance—
hallucinations are so easily produced. I don’t know if you have ever
seen a really good conjuror—”

“I won’t argue again,” said Cuss. “We’ve thrashed that out, Bunting.
And just now there’s these books—Ah! here’s some of what I take to be
Greek! Greek letters certainly.”

He pointed to the middle of the page. Mr. Bunting flushed slightly and
brought his face nearer, apparently finding some difficulty with his
glasses. Suddenly he became aware of a strange feeling at the nape of
his neck. He tried to raise his head, and encountered an immovable
resistance. The feeling was a curious pressure, the grip of a heavy,
firm hand, and it bore his chin irresistibly to the table. “Don’t move,
little men,” whispered a voice, “or I’ll brain you both!” He looked
into the face of Cuss, close to his own, and each saw a horrified
reflection of his own sickly astonishment.

“I’m sorry to handle you so roughly,” said the Voice, “but it’s
unavoidable.”

“Since when did you learn to pry into an investigator’s private
memoranda,” said the Voice; and two chins struck the table
simultaneously, and two sets of teeth rattled.

“Since when did you learn to invade the private rooms of a man in
misfortune?” and the concussion was repeated.

“Where have they put my clothes?”

“Listen,” said the Voice. “The windows are fastened and I’ve taken the
key out of the door. I am a fairly strong man, and I have the poker
handy—besides being invisible. There’s not the slightest doubt that I
could kill you both and get away quite easily if I wanted to—do you
understand? Very well. If I let you go will you promise not to try any
nonsense and do what I tell you?”

The vicar and the doctor looked at one another, and the doctor pulled a
face. “Yes,” said Mr. Bunting, and the doctor repeated it. Then the
pressure on the necks relaxed, and the doctor and the vicar sat up,
both very red in the face and wriggling their heads.

“Please keep sitting where you are,” said the Invisible Man. “Here’s
the poker, you see.”

“When I came into this room,” continued the Invisible Man, after
presenting the poker to the tip of the nose of each of his visitors, “I
did not expect to find it occupied, and I expected to find, in addition
to my books of memoranda, an outfit of clothing. Where is it? No—don’t
rise. I can see it’s gone. Now, just at present, though the days are
quite warm enough for an invisible man to run about stark, the evenings
are quite chilly. I want clothing—and other accommodation; and I must
also have those three books.”




CHAPTER XII.
THE INVISIBLE MAN LOSES HIS TEMPER


It is unavoidable that at this point the narrative should break off
again, for a certain very painful reason that will presently be
apparent. While these things were going on in the parlour, and while
Mr. Huxter was watching Mr. Marvel smoking his pipe against the gate,
not a dozen yards away were Mr. Hall and Teddy Henfrey discussing in a
state of cloudy puzzlement the one Iping topic.

Suddenly there came a violent thud against the door of the parlour, a
sharp cry, and then—silence.

“Hul-lo!” said Teddy Henfrey.

“Hul-lo!” from the Tap.

Mr. Hall took things in slowly but surely. “That ain’t right,” he said,
and came round from behind the bar towards the parlour door.

He and Teddy approached the door together, with intent faces. Their
eyes considered. “Summat wrong,” said Hall, and Henfrey nodded
agreement. Whiffs of an unpleasant chemical odour met them, and there
was a muffled sound of conversation, very rapid and subdued.

“You all right thur?” asked Hall, rapping.

The muttered conversation ceased abruptly, for a moment silence, then
the conversation was resumed, in hissing whispers, then a sharp cry of
“No! no, you don’t!” There came a sudden motion and the oversetting of
a chair, a brief struggle. Silence again.

“What the dooce?” exclaimed Henfrey, _sotto voce_.

“You—all—right thur?” asked Mr. Hall, sharply, again.

The Vicar’s voice answered with a curious jerking intonation: “Quite
ri-right. Please don’t—interrupt.”

“Odd!” said Mr. Henfrey.

“Odd!” said Mr. Hall.

“Says, ‘Don’t interrupt,’” said Henfrey.

“I heerd’n,” said Hall.

“And a sniff,” said Henfrey.

They remained listening. The conversation was rapid and subdued. “I
_can’t_,” said Mr. Bunting, his voice rising; “I tell you, sir, I
_will_ not.”

“What was that?” asked Henfrey.

“Says he wi’ nart,” said Hall. “Warn’t speaking to us, wuz he?”

“Disgraceful!” said Mr. Bunting, within.

“‘Disgraceful,’” said Mr. Henfrey. “I heard it—distinct.”

“Who’s that speaking now?” asked Henfrey.

“Mr. Cuss, I s’pose,” said Hall. “Can you hear—anything?”

Silence. The sounds within indistinct and perplexing.

“Sounds like throwing the table-cloth about,” said Hall.

Mrs. Hall appeared behind the bar. Hall made gestures of silence and
invitation. This aroused Mrs. Hall’s wifely opposition. “What yer
listenin’ there for, Hall?” she asked. “Ain’t you nothin’ better to
do—busy day like this?”

Hall tried to convey everything by grimaces and dumb show, but Mrs.
Hall was obdurate. She raised her voice. So Hall and Henfrey, rather
crestfallen, tiptoed back to the bar, gesticulating to explain to her.

At first she refused to see anything in what they had heard at all.
Then she insisted on Hall keeping silence, while Henfrey told her his
story. She was inclined to think the whole business nonsense—perhaps
they were just moving the furniture about. “I heerd’n say
‘disgraceful’; _that_ I did,” said Hall.

“_I_ heerd that, Mrs. Hall,” said Henfrey.

“Like as not—” began Mrs. Hall.

“Hsh!” said Mr. Teddy Henfrey. “Didn’t I hear the window?”

“What window?” asked Mrs. Hall.

“Parlour window,” said Henfrey.

Everyone stood listening intently. Mrs. Hall’s eyes, directed straight
before her, saw without seeing the brilliant oblong of the inn door,
the road white and vivid, and Huxter’s shop-front blistering in the
June sun. Abruptly Huxter’s door opened and Huxter appeared, eyes
staring with excitement, arms gesticulating. “Yap!” cried Huxter. “Stop
thief!” and he ran obliquely across the oblong towards the yard gates,
and vanished.

Simultaneously came a tumult from the parlour, and a sound of windows
being closed.

Hall, Henfrey, and the human contents of the tap rushed out at once
pell-mell into the street. They saw someone whisk round the corner
towards the road, and Mr. Huxter executing a complicated leap in the
air that ended on his face and shoulder. Down the street people were
standing astonished or running towards them.

Mr. Huxter was stunned. Henfrey stopped to discover this, but Hall and
the two labourers from the Tap rushed at once to the corner, shouting
incoherent things, and saw Mr. Marvel vanishing by the corner of the
church wall. They appear to have jumped to the impossible conclusion
that this was the Invisible Man suddenly become visible, and set off at
once along the lane in pursuit. But Hall had hardly run a dozen yards
before he gave a loud shout of astonishment and went flying headlong
sideways, clutching one of the labourers and bringing him to the
ground. He had been charged just as one charges a man at football. The
second labourer came round in a circle, stared, and conceiving that
Hall had tumbled over of his own accord, turned to resume the pursuit,
only to be tripped by the ankle just as Huxter had been. Then, as the
first labourer struggled to his feet, he was kicked sideways by a blow
that might have felled an ox.

As he went down, the rush from the direction of the village green came
round the corner. The first to appear was the proprietor of the
cocoanut shy, a burly man in a blue jersey. He was astonished to see
the lane empty save for three men sprawling absurdly on the ground. And
then something happened to his rear-most foot, and he went headlong and
rolled sideways just in time to graze the feet of his brother and
partner, following headlong. The two were then kicked, knelt on, fallen
over, and cursed by quite a number of over-hasty people.

Now when Hall and Henfrey and the labourers ran out of the house, Mrs.
Hall, who had been disciplined by years of experience, remained in the
bar next the till. And suddenly the parlour door was opened, and Mr.
Cuss appeared, and without glancing at her rushed at once down the
steps toward the corner. “Hold him!” he cried. “Don’t let him drop that
parcel.”

He knew nothing of the existence of Marvel. For the Invisible Man had
handed over the books and bundle in the yard. The face of Mr. Cuss was
angry and resolute, but his costume was defective, a sort of limp white
kilt that could only have passed muster in Greece. “Hold him!” he
bawled. “He’s got my trousers! And every stitch of the Vicar’s
clothes!”

“’Tend to him in a minute!” he cried to Henfrey as he passed the
prostrate Huxter, and, coming round the corner to join the tumult, was
promptly knocked off his feet into an indecorous sprawl. Somebody in
full flight trod heavily on his finger. He yelled, struggled to regain
his feet, was knocked against and thrown on all fours again, and became
aware that he was involved not in a capture, but a rout. Everyone was
running back to the village. He rose again and was hit severely behind
the ear. He staggered and set off back to the “Coach and Horses”
forthwith, leaping over the deserted Huxter, who was now sitting up, on
his way.

Behind him as he was halfway up the inn steps he heard a sudden yell of
rage, rising sharply out of the confusion of cries, and a sounding
smack in someone’s face. He recognised the voice as that of the
Invisible Man, and the note was that of a man suddenly infuriated by a
painful blow.

In another moment Mr. Cuss was back in the parlour. “He’s coming back,
Bunting!” he said, rushing in. “Save yourself!”

Mr. Bunting was standing in the window engaged in an attempt to clothe
himself in the hearth-rug and a _West Surrey Gazette_. “Who’s coming?”
he said, so startled that his costume narrowly escaped disintegration.

“Invisible Man,” said Cuss, and rushed on to the window. “We’d better
clear out from here! He’s fighting mad! Mad!”

In another moment he was out in the yard.

“Good heavens!” said Mr. Bunting, hesitating between two horrible
alternatives. He heard a frightful struggle in the passage of the inn,
and his decision was made. He clambered out of the window, adjusted his
costume hastily, and fled up the village as fast as his fat little legs
would carry him.

From the moment when the Invisible Man screamed with rage and Mr.
Bunting made his memorable flight up the village, it became impossible
to give a consecutive account of affairs in Iping. Possibly the
Invisible Man’s original intention was simply to cover Marvel’s retreat
with the clothes and books. But his temper, at no time very good, seems
to have gone completely at some chance blow, and forthwith he set to
smiting and overthrowing, for the mere satisfaction of hurting.

You must figure the street full of running figures, of doors slamming
and fights for hiding-places. You must figure the tumult suddenly
striking on the unstable equilibrium of old Fletcher’s planks and two
chairs—with cataclysmic results. You must figure an appalled couple
caught dismally in a swing. And then the whole tumultuous rush has
passed and the Iping street with its gauds and flags is deserted save
for the still raging unseen, and littered with cocoanuts, overthrown
canvas screens, and the scattered stock in trade of a sweetstuff stall.
Everywhere there is a sound of closing shutters and shoving bolts, and
the only visible humanity is an occasional flitting eye under a raised
eyebrow in the corner of a window pane.

The Invisible Man amused himself for a little while by breaking all the
windows in the “Coach and Horses,” and then he thrust a street lamp
through the parlour window of Mrs. Gribble. He it must have been who
cut the telegraph wire to Adderdean just beyond Higgins’ cottage on the
Adderdean road. And after that, as his peculiar qualities allowed, he
passed out of human perceptions altogether, and he was neither heard,
seen, nor felt in Iping any more. He vanished absolutely.

But it was the best part of two hours before any human being ventured
out again into the desolation of Iping street.




CHAPTER XIII.
MR. MARVEL DISCUSSES HIS RESIGNATION


When the dusk was gathering and Iping was just beginning to peep
timorously forth again upon the shattered wreckage of its Bank Holiday,
a short, thick-set man in a shabby silk hat was marching painfully
through the twilight behind the beechwoods on the road to Bramblehurst.
He carried three books bound together by some sort of ornamental
elastic ligature, and a bundle wrapped in a blue table-cloth. His
rubicund face expressed consternation and fatigue; he appeared to be in
a spasmodic sort of hurry. He was accompanied by a voice other than his
own, and ever and again he winced under the touch of unseen hands.

“If you give me the slip again,” said the Voice, “if you attempt to
give me the slip again—”

“Lord!” said Mr. Marvel. “That shoulder’s a mass of bruises as it is.”

“On my honour,” said the Voice, “I will kill you.”

“I didn’t try to give you the slip,” said Marvel, in a voice that was
not far remote from tears. “I swear I didn’t. I didn’t know the blessed
turning, that was all! How the devil was I to know the blessed turning?
As it is, I’ve been knocked about—”

“You’ll get knocked about a great deal more if you don’t mind,” said
the Voice, and Mr. Marvel abruptly became silent. He blew out his
cheeks, and his eyes were eloquent of despair.

“It’s bad enough to let these floundering yokels explode my little
secret, without _your_ cutting off with my books. It’s lucky for some
of them they cut and ran when they did! Here am I ... No one knew I was
invisible! And now what am I to do?”

“What am _I_ to do?” asked Marvel, _sotto voce_.

“It’s all about. It will be in the papers! Everybody will be looking
for me; everyone on their guard—” The Voice broke off into vivid curses
and ceased.

The despair of Mr. Marvel’s face deepened, and his pace slackened.

“Go on!” said the Voice.

Mr. Marvel’s face assumed a greyish tint between the ruddier patches.

“Don’t drop those books, stupid,” said the Voice, sharply—overtaking
him.

“The fact is,” said the Voice, “I shall have to make use of you....
You’re a poor tool, but I must.”

“I’m a _miserable_ tool,” said Marvel.

“You are,” said the Voice.

“I’m the worst possible tool you could have,” said Marvel.

“I’m not strong,” he said after a discouraging silence.

“I’m not over strong,” he repeated.

“No?”

“And my heart’s weak. That little business—I pulled it through, of
course—but bless you! I could have dropped.”

“Well?”

“I haven’t the nerve and strength for the sort of thing you want.”

“_I’ll_ stimulate you.”

“I wish you wouldn’t. I wouldn’t like to mess up your plans, you know.
But I might—out of sheer funk and misery.”

“You’d better not,” said the Voice, with quiet emphasis.

“I wish I was dead,” said Marvel.

“It ain’t justice,” he said; “you must admit.... It seems to me I’ve a
perfect right—”

“_Get_ on!” said the Voice.

Mr. Marvel mended his pace, and for a time they went in silence again.

“It’s devilish hard,” said Mr. Marvel.

This was quite ineffectual. He tried another tack.

“What do I make by it?” he began again in a tone of unendurable wrong.

“Oh! _shut up_!” said the Voice, with sudden amazing vigour. “I’ll see
to you all right. You do what you’re told. You’ll do it all right.
You’re a fool and all that, but you’ll do—”

“I tell you, sir, I’m not the man for it. Respectfully—but it _is_ so—”

“If you don’t shut up I shall twist your wrist again,” said the
Invisible Man. “I want to think.”

Presently two oblongs of yellow light appeared through the trees, and
the square tower of a church loomed through the gloaming. “I shall keep
my hand on your shoulder,” said the Voice, “all through the village. Go
straight through and try no foolery. It will be the worse for you if
you do.”

“I know that,” sighed Mr. Marvel, “I know all that.”

The unhappy-looking figure in the obsolete silk hat passed up the
street of the little village with his burdens, and vanished into the
gathering darkness beyond the lights of the windows.




CHAPTER XIV.
AT PORT STOWE


Ten o’clock the next morning found Mr. Marvel, unshaven, dirty, and
travel-stained, sitting with the books beside him and his hands deep in
his pockets, looking very weary, nervous, and uncomfortable, and
inflating his cheeks at infrequent intervals, on the bench outside a
little inn on the outskirts of Port Stowe. Beside him were the books,
but now they were tied with string. The bundle had been abandoned in
the pine-woods beyond Bramblehurst, in accordance with a change in the
plans of the Invisible Man. Mr. Marvel sat on the bench, and although
no one took the slightest notice of him, his agitation remained at
fever heat. His hands would go ever and again to his various pockets
with a curious nervous fumbling.

When he had been sitting for the best part of an hour, however, an
elderly mariner, carrying a newspaper, came out of the inn and sat down
beside him. “Pleasant day,” said the mariner.

Mr. Marvel glanced about him with something very like terror. “Very,”
he said.

“Just seasonable weather for the time of year,” said the mariner,
taking no denial.

“Quite,” said Mr. Marvel.

The mariner produced a toothpick, and (saving his regard) was engrossed
thereby for some minutes. His eyes meanwhile were at liberty to examine
Mr. Marvel’s dusty figure, and the books beside him. As he had
approached Mr. Marvel he had heard a sound like the dropping of coins
into a pocket. He was struck by the contrast of Mr. Marvel’s appearance
with this suggestion of opulence. Thence his mind wandered back again
to a topic that had taken a curiously firm hold of his imagination.

“Books?” he said suddenly, noisily finishing with the toothpick.

Mr. Marvel started and looked at them. “Oh, yes,” he said. “Yes,
they’re books.”

“There’s some extra-ordinary things in books,” said the mariner.

“I believe you,” said Mr. Marvel.

“And some extra-ordinary things out of ’em,” said the mariner.

“True likewise,” said Mr. Marvel. He eyed his interlocutor, and then
glanced about him.

“There’s some extra-ordinary things in newspapers, for example,” said
the mariner.

“There are.”

“In _this_ newspaper,” said the mariner.

“Ah!” said Mr. Marvel.

“There’s a story,” said the mariner, fixing Mr. Marvel with an eye that
was firm and deliberate; “there’s a story about an Invisible Man, for
instance.”

Mr. Marvel pulled his mouth askew and scratched his cheek and felt his
ears glowing. “What will they be writing next?” he asked faintly.
“Ostria, or America?”

“Neither,” said the mariner. “_Here_.”

“Lord!” said Mr. Marvel, starting.

“When I say _here_,” said the mariner, to Mr. Marvel’s intense relief,
“I don’t of course mean here in this place, I mean hereabouts.”

“An Invisible Man!” said Mr. Marvel. “And what’s _he_ been up to?”

“Everything,” said the mariner, controlling Marvel with his eye, and
then amplifying, “every—blessed—thing.”

“I ain’t seen a paper these four days,” said Marvel.

“Iping’s the place he started at,” said the mariner.

“In-_deed_!” said Mr. Marvel.

“He started there. And where he came from, nobody don’t seem to know.
Here it is: ‘Pe-culiar Story from Iping.’ And it says in this paper
that the evidence is extra-ordinary strong—extra-ordinary.”

“Lord!” said Mr. Marvel.

“But then, it’s an extra-ordinary story. There is a clergyman and a
medical gent witnesses—saw ’im all right and proper—or leastways didn’t
see ’im. He was staying, it says, at the ‘Coach an’ Horses,’ and no one
don’t seem to have been aware of his misfortune, it says, aware of his
misfortune, until in an Altercation in the inn, it says, his bandages
on his head was torn off. It was then ob-served that his head was
invisible. Attempts were At Once made to secure him, but casting off
his garments, it says, he succeeded in escaping, but not until after a
desperate struggle, in which he had inflicted serious injuries, it
says, on our worthy and able constable, Mr. J. A. Jaffers. Pretty
straight story, eh? Names and everything.”

“Lord!” said Mr. Marvel, looking nervously about him, trying to count
the money in his pockets by his unaided sense of touch, and full of a
strange and novel idea. “It sounds most astonishing.”

“Don’t it? Extra-ordinary, _I_ call it. Never heard tell of Invisible
Men before, I haven’t, but nowadays one hears such a lot of
extra-ordinary things—that—”

“That all he did?” asked Marvel, trying to seem at his ease.

“It’s enough, ain’t it?” said the mariner.

“Didn’t go Back by any chance?” asked Marvel. “Just escaped and that’s
all, eh?”

“All!” said the mariner. “Why!—ain’t it enough?”

“Quite enough,” said Marvel.

“I should think it was enough,” said the mariner. “I should think it
was enough.”

“He didn’t have any pals—it don’t say he had any pals, does it?” asked
Mr. Marvel, anxious.

“Ain’t one of a sort enough for you?” asked the mariner. “No, thank
Heaven, as one might say, he didn’t.”

He nodded his head slowly. “It makes me regular uncomfortable, the bare
thought of that chap running about the country! He is at present At
Large, and from certain evidence it is supposed that he
has—taken—_took_, I suppose they mean—the road to Port Stowe. You see
we’re right _in_ it! None of your American wonders, this time. And just
think of the things he might do! Where’d you be, if he took a drop over
and above, and had a fancy to go for you? Suppose he wants to rob—who
can prevent him? He can trespass, he can burgle, he could walk through
a cordon of policemen as easy as me or you could give the slip to a
blind man! Easier! For these here blind chaps hear uncommon sharp, I’m
told. And wherever there was liquor he fancied—”

“He’s got a tremenjous advantage, certainly,” said Mr. Marvel.
“And—well...”

“You’re right,” said the mariner. “He _has_.”

All this time Mr. Marvel had been glancing about him intently,
listening for faint footfalls, trying to detect imperceptible
movements. He seemed on the point of some great resolution. He coughed
behind his hand.

He looked about him again, listened, bent towards the mariner, and
lowered his voice: “The fact of it is—I happen—to know just a thing or
two about this Invisible Man. From private sources.”

“Oh!” said the mariner, interested. “_You_?”

“Yes,” said Mr. Marvel. “Me.”

“Indeed!” said the mariner. “And may I ask—”

“You’ll be astonished,” said Mr. Marvel behind his hand. “It’s
tremenjous.”

“Indeed!” said the mariner.

“The fact is,” began Mr. Marvel eagerly in a confidential undertone.
Suddenly his expression changed marvellously. “Ow!” he said. He rose
stiffly in his seat. His face was eloquent of physical suffering.
“Wow!” he said.

“What’s up?” said the mariner, concerned.

“Toothache,” said Mr. Marvel, and put his hand to his ear. He caught
hold of his books. “I must be getting on, I think,” he said. He edged
in a curious way along the seat away from his interlocutor. “But you
was just a-going to tell me about this here Invisible Man!” protested
the mariner. Mr. Marvel seemed to consult with himself. “Hoax,” said a
Voice. “It’s a hoax,” said Mr. Marvel.

“But it’s in the paper,” said the mariner.

“Hoax all the same,” said Marvel. “I know the chap that started the
lie. There ain’t no Invisible Man whatsoever—Blimey.”

“But how ’bout this paper? D’you mean to say—?”

“Not a word of it,” said Marvel, stoutly.

The mariner stared, paper in hand. Mr. Marvel jerkily faced about.
“Wait a bit,” said the mariner, rising and speaking slowly, “D’you mean
to say—?”

“I do,” said Mr. Marvel.

“Then why did you let me go on and tell you all this blarsted stuff,
then? What d’yer mean by letting a man make a fool of himself like that
for? Eh?”

Mr. Marvel blew out his cheeks. The mariner was suddenly very red
indeed; he clenched his hands. “I been talking here this ten minutes,”
he said; “and you, you little pot-bellied, leathery-faced son of an old
boot, couldn’t have the elementary manners—”

“Don’t you come bandying words with _me_,” said Mr. Marvel.

“Bandying words! I’m a jolly good mind—”

“Come up,” said a Voice, and Mr. Marvel was suddenly whirled about and
started marching off in a curious spasmodic manner. “You’d better move
on,” said the mariner. “Who’s moving on?” said Mr. Marvel. He was
receding obliquely with a curious hurrying gait, with occasional
violent jerks forward. Some way along the road he began a muttered
monologue, protests and recriminations.

“Silly devil!” said the mariner, legs wide apart, elbows akimbo,
watching the receding figure. “I’ll show you, you silly ass—hoaxing
_me_! It’s here—on the paper!”

Mr. Marvel retorted incoherently and, receding, was hidden by a bend in
the road, but the mariner still stood magnificent in the midst of the
way, until the approach of a butcher’s cart dislodged him. Then he
turned himself towards Port Stowe. “Full of extra-ordinary asses,” he
said softly to himself. “Just to take me down a bit—that was his silly
game—It’s on the paper!”

And there was another extraordinary thing he was presently to hear,
that had happened quite close to him. And that was a vision of a “fist
full of money” (no less) travelling without visible agency, along by
the wall at the corner of St. Michael’s Lane. A brother mariner had
seen this wonderful sight that very morning. He had snatched at the
money forthwith and had been knocked headlong, and when he had got to
his feet the butterfly money had vanished. Our mariner was in the mood
to believe anything, he declared, but that was a bit _too_ stiff.
Afterwards, however, he began to think things over.

The story of the flying money was true. And all about that
neighbourhood, even from the august London and Country Banking Company,
from the tills of shops and inns—doors standing that sunny weather
entirely open—money had been quietly and dexterously making off that
day in handfuls and rouleaux, floating quietly along by walls and shady
places, dodging quickly from the approaching eyes of men. And it had,
though no man had traced it, invariably ended its mysterious flight in
the pocket of that agitated gentleman in the obsolete silk hat, sitting
outside the little inn on the outskirts of Port Stowe.

It was ten days after—and indeed only when the Burdock story was
already old—that the mariner collated these facts and began to
understand how near he had been to the wonderful Invisible Man.




CHAPTER XV.
THE MAN WHO WAS RUNNING


In the early evening time Dr. Kemp was sitting in his study in the
belvedere on the hill overlooking Burdock. It was a pleasant little
room, with three windows—north, west, and south—and bookshelves covered
with books and scientific publications, and a broad writing-table, and,
under the north window, a microscope, glass slips, minute instruments,
some cultures, and scattered bottles of reagents. Dr. Kemp’s solar lamp
was lit, albeit the sky was still bright with the sunset light, and his
blinds were up because there was no offence of peering outsiders to
require them pulled down. Dr. Kemp was a tall and slender young man,
with flaxen hair and a moustache almost white, and the work he was upon
would earn him, he hoped, the fellowship of the Royal Society, so
highly did he think of it.

And his eye, presently wandering from his work, caught the sunset
blazing at the back of the hill that is over against his own. For a
minute perhaps he sat, pen in mouth, admiring the rich golden colour
above the crest, and then his attention was attracted by the little
figure of a man, inky black, running over the hill-brow towards him. He
was a shortish little man, and he wore a high hat, and he was running
so fast that his legs verily twinkled.

“Another of those fools,” said Dr. Kemp. “Like that ass who ran into me
this morning round a corner, with the ‘’Visible Man a-coming, sir!’ I
can’t imagine what possesses people. One might think we were in the
thirteenth century.”

He got up, went to the window, and stared at the dusky hillside, and
the dark little figure tearing down it. “He seems in a confounded
hurry,” said Dr. Kemp, “but he doesn’t seem to be getting on. If his
pockets were full of lead, he couldn’t run heavier.”

“Spurted, sir,” said Dr. Kemp.

In another moment the higher of the villas that had clambered up the
hill from Burdock had occulted the running figure. He was visible again
for a moment, and again, and then again, three times between the three
detached houses that came next, and then the terrace hid him.

“Asses!” said Dr. Kemp, swinging round on his heel and walking back to
his writing-table.

But those who saw the fugitive nearer, and perceived the abject terror
on his perspiring face, being themselves in the open roadway, did not
share in the doctor’s contempt. By the man pounded, and as he ran he
chinked like a well-filled purse that is tossed to and fro. He looked
neither to the right nor the left, but his dilated eyes stared straight
downhill to where the lamps were being lit, and the people were crowded
in the street. And his ill-shaped mouth fell apart, and a glairy foam
lay on his lips, and his breath came hoarse and noisy. All he passed
stopped and began staring up the road and down, and interrogating one
another with an inkling of discomfort for the reason of his haste.

And then presently, far up the hill, a dog playing in the road yelped
and ran under a gate, and as they still wondered something—a wind—a
pad, pad, pad,—a sound like a panting breathing, rushed by.

People screamed. People sprang off the pavement: It passed in shouts,
it passed by instinct down the hill. They were shouting in the street
before Marvel was halfway there. They were bolting into houses and
slamming the doors behind them, with the news. He heard it and made one
last desperate spurt. Fear came striding by, rushed ahead of him, and
in a moment had seized the town.

“The Invisible Man is coming! The Invisible Man!”




CHAPTER XVI.
IN THE “JOLLY CRICKETERS”


The “Jolly Cricketers” is just at the bottom of the hill, where the
tram-lines begin. The barman leant his fat red arms on the counter and
talked of horses with an anaemic cabman, while a black-bearded man in
grey snapped up biscuit and cheese, drank Burton, and conversed in
American with a policeman off duty.

“What’s the shouting about!” said the anaemic cabman, going off at a
tangent, trying to see up the hill over the dirty yellow blind in the
low window of the inn. Somebody ran by outside. “Fire, perhaps,” said
the barman.

Footsteps approached, running heavily, the door was pushed open
violently, and Marvel, weeping and dishevelled, his hat gone, the neck
of his coat torn open, rushed in, made a convulsive turn, and attempted
to shut the door. It was held half open by a strap.

“Coming!” he bawled, his voice shrieking with terror. “He’s coming. The
’Visible Man! After me! For Gawd’s sake! ’Elp! ’Elp! ’Elp!”

“Shut the doors,” said the policeman. “Who’s coming? What’s the row?”
He went to the door, released the strap, and it slammed. The American
closed the other door.

“Lemme go inside,” said Marvel, staggering and weeping, but still
clutching the books. “Lemme go inside. Lock me in—somewhere. I tell you
he’s after me. I give him the slip. He said he’d kill me and he will.”

“_You’re_ safe,” said the man with the black beard. “The door’s shut.
What’s it all about?”

“Lemme go inside,” said Marvel, and shrieked aloud as a blow suddenly
made the fastened door shiver and was followed by a hurried rapping and
a shouting outside. “Hullo,” cried the policeman, “who’s there?” Mr.
Marvel began to make frantic dives at panels that looked like doors.
“He’ll kill me—he’s got a knife or something. For Gawd’s sake—!”

“Here you are,” said the barman. “Come in here.” And he held up the
flap of the bar.

Mr. Marvel rushed behind the bar as the summons outside was repeated.
“Don’t open the door,” he screamed. “_Please_ don’t open the door.
_Where_ shall I hide?”

“This, this Invisible Man, then?” asked the man with the black beard,
with one hand behind him. “I guess it’s about time we saw him.”

The window of the inn was suddenly smashed in, and there was a
screaming and running to and fro in the street. The policeman had been
standing on the settee staring out, craning to see who was at the door.
He got down with raised eyebrows. “It’s that,” he said. The barman
stood in front of the bar-parlour door which was now locked on Mr.
Marvel, stared at the smashed window, and came round to the two other
men.

Everything was suddenly quiet. “I wish I had my truncheon,” said the
policeman, going irresolutely to the door. “Once we open, in he comes.
There’s no stopping him.”

“Don’t you be in too much hurry about that door,” said the anaemic
cabman, anxiously.

“Draw the bolts,” said the man with the black beard, “and if he comes—”
He showed a revolver in his hand.

“That won’t do,” said the policeman; “that’s murder.”

“I know what country I’m in,” said the man with the beard. “I’m going
to let off at his legs. Draw the bolts.”

“Not with that blinking thing going off behind me,” said the barman,
craning over the blind.

“Very well,” said the man with the black beard, and stooping down,
revolver ready, drew them himself. Barman, cabman, and policeman faced
about.

“Come in,” said the bearded man in an undertone, standing back and
facing the unbolted doors with his pistol behind him. No one came in,
the door remained closed. Five minutes afterwards when a second cabman
pushed his head in cautiously, they were still waiting, and an anxious
face peered out of the bar-parlour and supplied information. “Are all
the doors of the house shut?” asked Marvel. “He’s going round—prowling
round. He’s as artful as the devil.”

“Good Lord!” said the burly barman. “There’s the back! Just watch them
doors! I say—!” He looked about him helplessly. The bar-parlour door
slammed and they heard the key turn. “There’s the yard door and the
private door. The yard door—”

He rushed out of the bar.

In a minute he reappeared with a carving-knife in his hand. “The yard
door was open!” he said, and his fat underlip dropped. “He may be in
the house now!” said the first cabman.

“He’s not in the kitchen,” said the barman. “There’s two women there,
and I’ve stabbed every inch of it with this little beef slicer. And
they don’t think he’s come in. They haven’t noticed—”

“Have you fastened it?” asked the first cabman.

“I’m out of frocks,” said the barman.

The man with the beard replaced his revolver. And even as he did so the
flap of the bar was shut down and the bolt clicked, and then with a
tremendous thud the catch of the door snapped and the bar-parlour door
burst open. They heard Marvel squeal like a caught leveret, and
forthwith they were clambering over the bar to his rescue. The bearded
man’s revolver cracked and the looking-glass at the back of the parlour
starred and came smashing and tinkling down.

As the barman entered the room he saw Marvel, curiously crumpled up and
struggling against the door that led to the yard and kitchen. The door
flew open while the barman hesitated, and Marvel was dragged into the
kitchen. There was a scream and a clatter of pans. Marvel, head down,
and lugging back obstinately, was forced to the kitchen door, and the
bolts were drawn.

Then the policeman, who had been trying to pass the barman, rushed in,
followed by one of the cabmen, gripped the wrist of the invisible hand
that collared Marvel, was hit in the face and went reeling back. The
door opened, and Marvel made a frantic effort to obtain a lodgment
behind it. Then the cabman collared something. “I got him,” said the
cabman. The barman’s red hands came clawing at the unseen. “Here he
is!” said the barman.

Mr. Marvel, released, suddenly dropped to the ground and made an
attempt to crawl behind the legs of the fighting men. The struggle
blundered round the edge of the door. The voice of the Invisible Man
was heard for the first time, yelling out sharply, as the policeman
trod on his foot. Then he cried out passionately and his fists flew
round like flails. The cabman suddenly whooped and doubled up, kicked
under the diaphragm. The door into the bar-parlour from the kitchen
slammed and covered Mr. Marvel’s retreat. The men in the kitchen found
themselves clutching at and struggling with empty air.

“Where’s he gone?” cried the man with the beard. “Out?”

“This way,” said the policeman, stepping into the yard and stopping.

A piece of tile whizzed by his head and smashed among the crockery on
the kitchen table.

“I’ll show him,” shouted the man with the black beard, and suddenly a
steel barrel shone over the policeman’s shoulder, and five bullets had
followed one another into the twilight whence the missile had come. As
he fired, the man with the beard moved his hand in a horizontal curve,
so that his shots radiated out into the narrow yard like spokes from a
wheel.

A silence followed. “Five cartridges,” said the man with the black
beard. “That’s the best of all. Four aces and a joker. Get a lantern,
someone, and come and feel about for his body.”




CHAPTER XVII.
DR. KEMP’S VISITOR


Dr. Kemp had continued writing in his study until the shots aroused
him. Crack, crack, crack, they came one after the other.

“Hullo!” said Dr. Kemp, putting his pen into his mouth again and
listening. “Who’s letting off revolvers in Burdock? What are the asses
at now?”

He went to the south window, threw it up, and leaning out stared down
on the network of windows, beaded gas-lamps and shops, with its black
interstices of roof and yard that made up the town at night. “Looks
like a crowd down the hill,” he said, “by ‘The Cricketers,’” and
remained watching. Thence his eyes wandered over the town to far away
where the ships’ lights shone, and the pier glowed—a little
illuminated, facetted pavilion like a gem of yellow light. The moon in
its first quarter hung over the westward hill, and the stars were clear
and almost tropically bright.

After five minutes, during which his mind had travelled into a remote
speculation of social conditions of the future, and lost itself at last
over the time dimension, Dr. Kemp roused himself with a sigh, pulled
down the window again, and returned to his writing desk.

It must have been about an hour after this that the front-door bell
rang. He had been writing slackly, and with intervals of abstraction,
since the shots. He sat listening. He heard the servant answer the
door, and waited for her feet on the staircase, but she did not come.
“Wonder what that was,” said Dr. Kemp.

He tried to resume his work, failed, got up, went downstairs from his
study to the landing, rang, and called over the balustrade to the
housemaid as she appeared in the hall below. “Was that a letter?” he
asked.

“Only a runaway ring, sir,” she answered.

“I’m restless to-night,” he said to himself. He went back to his study,
and this time attacked his work resolutely. In a little while he was
hard at work again, and the only sounds in the room were the ticking of
the clock and the subdued shrillness of his quill, hurrying in the very
centre of the circle of light his lampshade threw on his table.

It was two o’clock before Dr. Kemp had finished his work for the night.
He rose, yawned, and went downstairs to bed. He had already removed his
coat and vest, when he noticed that he was thirsty. He took a candle
and went down to the dining-room in search of a syphon and whiskey.

Dr. Kemp’s scientific pursuits have made him a very observant man, and
as he recrossed the hall, he noticed a dark spot on the linoleum near
the mat at the foot of the stairs. He went on upstairs, and then it
suddenly occurred to him to ask himself what the spot on the linoleum
might be. Apparently some subconscious element was at work. At any
rate, he turned with his burden, went back to the hall, put down the
syphon and whiskey, and bending down, touched the spot. Without any
great surprise he found it had the stickiness and colour of drying
blood.

He took up his burden again, and returned upstairs, looking about him
and trying to account for the blood-spot. On the landing he saw
something and stopped astonished. The door-handle of his own room was
blood-stained.

He looked at his own hand. It was quite clean, and then he remembered
that the door of his room had been open when he came down from his
study, and that consequently he had not touched the handle at all. He
went straight into his room, his face quite calm—perhaps a trifle more
resolute than usual. His glance, wandering inquisitively, fell on the
bed. On the counterpane was a mess of blood, and the sheet had been
torn. He had not noticed this before because he had walked straight to
the dressing-table. On the further side the bedclothes were depressed
as if someone had been recently sitting there.

Then he had an odd impression that he had heard a low voice say, “Good
Heavens!—Kemp!” But Dr. Kemp was no believer in voices.

He stood staring at the tumbled sheets. Was that really a voice? He
looked about again, but noticed nothing further than the disordered and
blood-stained bed. Then he distinctly heard a movement across the room,
near the wash-hand stand. All men, however highly educated, retain some
superstitious inklings. The feeling that is called “eerie” came upon
him. He closed the door of the room, came forward to the
dressing-table, and put down his burdens. Suddenly, with a start, he
perceived a coiled and blood-stained bandage of linen rag hanging in
mid-air, between him and the wash-hand stand.

He stared at this in amazement. It was an empty bandage, a bandage
properly tied but quite empty. He would have advanced to grasp it, but
a touch arrested him, and a voice speaking quite close to him.

“Kemp!” said the Voice.

“Eh?” said Kemp, with his mouth open.

“Keep your nerve,” said the Voice. “I’m an Invisible Man.”

Kemp made no answer for a space, simply stared at the bandage.
“Invisible Man,” he said.

“I am an Invisible Man,” repeated the Voice.

The story he had been active to ridicule only that morning rushed
through Kemp’s brain. He does not appear to have been either very much
frightened or very greatly surprised at the moment. Realisation came
later.

“I thought it was all a lie,” he said. The thought uppermost in his
mind was the reiterated arguments of the morning. “Have you a bandage
on?” he asked.

“Yes,” said the Invisible Man.

“Oh!” said Kemp, and then roused himself. “I say!” he said. “But this
is nonsense. It’s some trick.” He stepped forward suddenly, and his
hand, extended towards the bandage, met invisible fingers.

He recoiled at the touch and his colour changed.

“Keep steady, Kemp, for God’s sake! I want help badly. Stop!”

The hand gripped his arm. He struck at it.

“Kemp!” cried the Voice. “Kemp! Keep steady!” and the grip tightened.

A frantic desire to free himself took possession of Kemp. The hand of
the bandaged arm gripped his shoulder, and he was suddenly tripped and
flung backwards upon the bed. He opened his mouth to shout, and the
corner of the sheet was thrust between his teeth. The Invisible Man had
him down grimly, but his arms were free and he struck and tried to kick
savagely.

“Listen to reason, will you?” said the Invisible Man, sticking to him
in spite of a pounding in the ribs. “By Heaven! you’ll madden me in a
minute!

“Lie still, you fool!” bawled the Invisible Man in Kemp’s ear.

Kemp struggled for another moment and then lay still.

“If you shout, I’ll smash your face,” said the Invisible Man, relieving
his mouth.

“I’m an Invisible Man. It’s no foolishness, and no magic. I really am
an Invisible Man. And I want your help. I don’t want to hurt you, but
if you behave like a frantic rustic, I must. Don’t you remember me,
Kemp? Griffin, of University College?”

“Let me get up,” said Kemp. “I’ll stop where I am. And let me sit quiet
for a minute.”

He sat up and felt his neck.

“I am Griffin, of University College, and I have made myself invisible.
I am just an ordinary man—a man you have known—made invisible.”

“Griffin?” said Kemp.

“Griffin,” answered the Voice. A younger student than you were, almost
an albino, six feet high, and broad, with a pink and white face and red
eyes, who won the medal for chemistry.”

“I am confused,” said Kemp. “My brain is rioting. What has this to do
with Griffin?”

“I _am_ Griffin.”

Kemp thought. “It’s horrible,” he said. “But what devilry must happen
to make a man invisible?”

“It’s no devilry. It’s a process, sane and intelligible enough—”

“It’s horrible!” said Kemp. “How on earth—?”

“It’s horrible enough. But I’m wounded and in pain, and tired ... Great
God! Kemp, you are a man. Take it steady. Give me some food and drink,
and let me sit down here.”

Kemp stared at the bandage as it moved across the room, then saw a
basket chair dragged across the floor and come to rest near the bed. It
creaked, and the seat was depressed the quarter of an inch or so. He
rubbed his eyes and felt his neck again. “This beats ghosts,” he said,
and laughed stupidly.

“That’s better. Thank Heaven, you’re getting sensible!”

“Or silly,” said Kemp, and knuckled his eyes.

“Give me some whiskey. I’m near dead.”

“It didn’t feel so. Where are you? If I get up shall I run into you?
_There_! all right. Whiskey? Here. Where shall I give it to you?”

The chair creaked and Kemp felt the glass drawn away from him. He let
go by an effort; his instinct was all against it. It came to rest
poised twenty inches above the front edge of the seat of the chair. He
stared at it in infinite perplexity. “This is—this must be—hypnotism.
You have suggested you are invisible.”

“Nonsense,” said the Voice.

“It’s frantic.”

“Listen to me.”

“I demonstrated conclusively this morning,” began Kemp, “that
invisibility—”

“Never mind what you’ve demonstrated!—I’m starving,” said the Voice,
“and the night is chilly to a man without clothes.”

“Food?” said Kemp.

The tumbler of whiskey tilted itself. “Yes,” said the Invisible Man
rapping it down. “Have you a dressing-gown?”

Kemp made some exclamation in an undertone. He walked to a wardrobe and
produced a robe of dingy scarlet. “This do?” he asked. It was taken
from him. It hung limp for a moment in mid-air, fluttered weirdly,
stood full and decorous buttoning itself, and sat down in his chair.
“Drawers, socks, slippers would be a comfort,” said the Unseen, curtly.
“And food.”

“Anything. But this is the insanest thing I ever was in, in my life!”

He turned out his drawers for the articles, and then went downstairs to
ransack his larder. He came back with some cold cutlets and bread,
pulled up a light table, and placed them before his guest. “Never mind
knives,” said his visitor, and a cutlet hung in mid-air, with a sound
of gnawing.

“Invisible!” said Kemp, and sat down on a bedroom chair.

“I always like to get something about me before I eat,” said the
Invisible Man, with a full mouth, eating greedily. “Queer fancy!”

“I suppose that wrist is all right,” said Kemp.

“Trust me,” said the Invisible Man.

“Of all the strange and wonderful—”

“Exactly. But it’s odd I should blunder into _your_ house to get my
bandaging. My first stroke of luck! Anyhow I meant to sleep in this
house to-night. You must stand that! It’s a filthy nuisance, my blood
showing, isn’t it? Quite a clot over there. Gets visible as it
coagulates, I see. It’s only the living tissue I’ve changed, and only
for as long as I’m alive.... I’ve been in the house three hours.”

“But how’s it done?” began Kemp, in a tone of exasperation. “Confound
it! The whole business—it’s unreasonable from beginning to end.”

“Quite reasonable,” said the Invisible Man. “Perfectly reasonable.”

He reached over and secured the whiskey bottle. Kemp stared at the
devouring dressing gown. A ray of candle-light penetrating a torn patch
in the right shoulder, made a triangle of light under the left ribs.
“What were the shots?” he asked. “How did the shooting begin?”

“There was a real fool of a man—a sort of confederate of mine—curse
him!—who tried to steal my money. _Has_ done so.”

“Is _he_ invisible too?”

“No.”

“Well?”

“Can’t I have some more to eat before I tell you all that? I’m
hungry—in pain. And you want me to tell stories!”

Kemp got up. “_You_ didn’t do any shooting?” he asked.

“Not me,” said his visitor. “Some fool I’d never seen fired at random.
A lot of them got scared. They all got scared at me. Curse them!—I
say—I want more to eat than this, Kemp.”

“I’ll see what there is to eat downstairs,” said Kemp. “Not much, I’m
afraid.”

After he had done eating, and he made a heavy meal, the Invisible Man
demanded a cigar. He bit the end savagely before Kemp could find a
knife, and cursed when the outer leaf loosened. It was strange to see
him smoking; his mouth, and throat, pharynx and nares, became visible
as a sort of whirling smoke cast.

“This blessed gift of smoking!” he said, and puffed vigorously. “I’m
lucky to have fallen upon you, Kemp. You must help me. Fancy tumbling
on you just now! I’m in a devilish scrape—I’ve been mad, I think. The
things I have been through! But we will do things yet. Let me tell
you—”

He helped himself to more whiskey and soda. Kemp got up, looked about
him, and fetched a glass from his spare room. “It’s wild—but I suppose
I may drink.”

“You haven’t changed much, Kemp, these dozen years. You fair men don’t.
Cool and methodical—after the first collapse. I must tell you. We will
work together!”

“But how was it all done?” said Kemp, “and how did you get like this?”

“For God’s sake, let me smoke in peace for a little while! And then I
will begin to tell you.”

But the story was not told that night. The Invisible Man’s wrist was
growing painful; he was feverish, exhausted, and his mind came round to
brood upon his chase down the hill and the struggle about the inn. He
spoke in fragments of Marvel, he smoked faster, his voice grew angry.
Kemp tried to gather what he could.

“He was afraid of me, I could see that he was afraid of me,” said the
Invisible Man many times over. “He meant to give me the slip—he was
always casting about! What a fool I was!

“The cur!

“I should have killed him!”

“Where did you get the money?” asked Kemp, abruptly.

The Invisible Man was silent for a space. “I can’t tell you to-night,”
he said.

He groaned suddenly and leant forward, supporting his invisible head on
invisible hands. “Kemp,” he said, “I’ve had no sleep for near three
days, except a couple of dozes of an hour or so. I must sleep soon.”

“Well, have my room—have this room.”

“But how can I sleep? If I sleep—he will get away. Ugh! What does it
matter?”

“What’s the shot wound?” asked Kemp, abruptly.

“Nothing—scratch and blood. Oh, God! How I want sleep!”

“Why not?”

The Invisible Man appeared to be regarding Kemp. “Because I’ve a
particular objection to being caught by my fellow-men,” he said slowly.

Kemp started.

“Fool that I am!” said the Invisible Man, striking the table smartly.
“I’ve put the idea into your head.”




CHAPTER XVIII.
THE INVISIBLE MAN SLEEPS


Exhausted and wounded as the Invisible Man was, he refused to accept
Kemp’s word that his freedom should be respected. He examined the two
windows of the bedroom, drew up the blinds and opened the sashes, to
confirm Kemp’s statement that a retreat by them would be possible.
Outside the night was very quiet and still, and the new moon was
setting over the down. Then he examined the keys of the bedroom and the
two dressing-room doors, to satisfy himself that these also could be
made an assurance of freedom. Finally he expressed himself satisfied.
He stood on the hearth rug and Kemp heard the sound of a yawn.

“I’m sorry,” said the Invisible Man, “if I cannot tell you all that I
have done to-night. But I am worn out. It’s grotesque, no doubt. It’s
horrible! But believe me, Kemp, in spite of your arguments of this
morning, it is quite a possible thing. I have made a discovery. I meant
to keep it to myself. I can’t. I must have a partner. And you.... We
can do such things ... But to-morrow. Now, Kemp, I feel as though I
must sleep or perish.”

Kemp stood in the middle of the room staring at the headless garment.
“I suppose I must leave you,” he said. “It’s—incredible. Three things
happening like this, overturning all my preconceptions—would make me
insane. But it’s real! Is there anything more that I can get you?”

“Only bid me good-night,” said Griffin.

“Good-night,” said Kemp, and shook an invisible hand. He walked
sideways to the door. Suddenly the dressing-gown walked quickly towards
him. “Understand me!” said the dressing-gown. “No attempts to hamper
me, or capture me! Or—”

Kemp’s face changed a little. “I thought I gave you my word,” he said.

Kemp closed the door softly behind him, and the key was turned upon him
forthwith. Then, as he stood with an expression of passive amazement on
his face, the rapid feet came to the door of the dressing-room and that
too was locked. Kemp slapped his brow with his hand. “Am I dreaming?
Has the world gone mad—or have I?”

He laughed, and put his hand to the locked door. “Barred out of my own
bedroom, by a flagrant absurdity!” he said.

He walked to the head of the staircase, turned, and stared at the
locked doors. “It’s fact,” he said. He put his fingers to his slightly
bruised neck. “Undeniable fact!

“But—”

He shook his head hopelessly, turned, and went downstairs.

He lit the dining-room lamp, got out a cigar, and began pacing the
room, ejaculating. Now and then he would argue with himself.

“Invisible!” he said.

“Is there such a thing as an invisible animal? ... In the sea, yes.
Thousands—millions. All the larvae, all the little nauplii and
tornarias, all the microscopic things, the jelly-fish. In the sea there
are more things invisible than visible! I never thought of that before.
And in the ponds too! All those little pond-life things—specks of
colourless translucent jelly! But in air? No!

“It can’t be.

“But after all—why not?

“If a man was made of glass he would still be visible.”

His meditation became profound. The bulk of three cigars had passed
into the invisible or diffused as a white ash over the carpet before he
spoke again. Then it was merely an exclamation. He turned aside, walked
out of the room, and went into his little consulting-room and lit the
gas there. It was a little room, because Dr. Kemp did not live by
practice, and in it were the day’s newspapers. The morning’s paper lay
carelessly opened and thrown aside. He caught it up, turned it over,
and read the account of a “Strange Story from Iping” that the mariner
at Port Stowe had spelt over so painfully to Mr. Marvel. Kemp read it
swiftly.

“Wrapped up!” said Kemp. “Disguised! Hiding it! ‘No one seems to have
been aware of his misfortune.’ What the devil _is_ his game?”

He dropped the paper, and his eye went seeking. “Ah!” he said, and
caught up the _St. James’ Gazette_, lying folded up as it arrived. “Now
we shall get at the truth,” said Dr. Kemp. He rent the paper open; a
couple of columns confronted him. “An Entire Village in Sussex goes
Mad” was the heading.

“Good Heavens!” said Kemp, reading eagerly an incredulous account of
the events in Iping, of the previous afternoon, that have already been
described. Over the leaf the report in the morning paper had been
reprinted.

He re-read it. “Ran through the streets striking right and left.
Jaffers insensible. Mr. Huxter in great pain—still unable to describe
what he saw. Painful humiliation—vicar. Woman ill with terror! Windows
smashed. This extraordinary story probably a fabrication. Too good not
to print—_cum grano_!”

He dropped the paper and stared blankly in front of him. “Probably a
fabrication!”

He caught up the paper again, and re-read the whole business. “But when
does the Tramp come in? Why the deuce was he chasing a tramp?”

He sat down abruptly on the surgical bench. “He’s not only invisible,”
he said, “but he’s mad! Homicidal!”

When dawn came to mingle its pallor with the lamp-light and cigar smoke
of the dining-room, Kemp was still pacing up and down, trying to grasp
the incredible.

He was altogether too excited to sleep. His servants, descending
sleepily, discovered him, and were inclined to think that over-study
had worked this ill on him. He gave them extraordinary but quite
explicit instructions to lay breakfast for two in the belvedere
study—and then to confine themselves to the basement and ground-floor.
Then he continued to pace the dining-room until the morning’s paper
came. That had much to say and little to tell, beyond the confirmation
of the evening before, and a very badly written account of another
remarkable tale from Port Burdock. This gave Kemp the essence of the
happenings at the “Jolly Cricketers,” and the name of Marvel. “He has
made me keep with him twenty-four hours,” Marvel testified. Certain
minor facts were added to the Iping story, notably the cutting of the
village telegraph-wire. But there was nothing to throw light on the
connexion between the Invisible Man and the Tramp; for Mr. Marvel had
supplied no information about the three books, or the money with which
he was lined. The incredulous tone had vanished and a shoal of
reporters and inquirers were already at work elaborating the matter.

Kemp read every scrap of the report and sent his housemaid out to get
every one of the morning papers she could. These also he devoured.

“He is invisible!” he said. “And it reads like rage growing to mania!
The things he may do! The things he may do! And he’s upstairs free as
the air. What on earth ought I to do?”

“For instance, would it be a breach of faith if—? No.”

He went to a little untidy desk in the corner, and began a note. He
tore this up half written, and wrote another. He read it over and
considered it. Then he took an envelope and addressed it to “Colonel
Adye, Port Burdock.”

The Invisible Man awoke even as Kemp was doing this. He awoke in an
evil temper, and Kemp, alert for every sound, heard his pattering feet
rush suddenly across the bedroom overhead. Then a chair was flung over
and the wash-hand stand tumbler smashed. Kemp hurried upstairs and
rapped eagerly.




CHAPTER XIX.
CERTAIN FIRST PRINCIPLES


“What’s the matter?” asked Kemp, when the Invisible Man admitted him.

“Nothing,” was the answer.

“But, confound it! The smash?”

“Fit of temper,” said the Invisible Man. “Forgot this arm; and it’s
sore.”

“You’re rather liable to that sort of thing.”

“I am.”

Kemp walked across the room and picked up the fragments of broken
glass. “All the facts are out about you,” said Kemp, standing up with
the glass in his hand; “all that happened in Iping, and down the hill.
The world has become aware of its invisible citizen. But no one knows
you are here.”

The Invisible Man swore.

“The secret’s out. I gather it was a secret. I don’t know what your
plans are, but of course I’m anxious to help you.”

The Invisible Man sat down on the bed.

“There’s breakfast upstairs,” said Kemp, speaking as easily as
possible, and he was delighted to find his strange guest rose
willingly. Kemp led the way up the narrow staircase to the belvedere.

“Before we can do anything else,” said Kemp, “I must understand a
little more about this invisibility of yours.” He had sat down, after
one nervous glance out of the window, with the air of a man who has
talking to do. His doubts of the sanity of the entire business flashed
and vanished again as he looked across to where Griffin sat at the
breakfast-table—a headless, handless dressing-gown, wiping unseen lips
on a miraculously held serviette.

“It’s simple enough—and credible enough,” said Griffin, putting the
serviette aside and leaning the invisible head on an invisible hand.

“No doubt, to you, but—” Kemp laughed.

“Well, yes; to me it seemed wonderful at first, no doubt. But now,
great God! ... But we will do great things yet! I came on the stuff
first at Chesilstowe.”

“Chesilstowe?”

“I went there after I left London. You know I dropped medicine and took
up physics? No; well, I did. _Light_ fascinated me.”

“Ah!”

“Optical density! The whole subject is a network of riddles—a network
with solutions glimmering elusively through. And being but
two-and-twenty and full of enthusiasm, I said, ‘I will devote my life
to this. This is worth while.’ You know what fools we are at
two-and-twenty?”

“Fools then or fools now,” said Kemp.

“As though knowing could be any satisfaction to a man!

“But I went to work—like a slave. And I had hardly worked and thought
about the matter six months before light came through one of the meshes
suddenly—blindingly! I found a general principle of pigments and
refraction—a formula, a geometrical expression involving four
dimensions. Fools, common men, even common mathematicians, do not know
anything of what some general expression may mean to the student of
molecular physics. In the books—the books that tramp has hidden—there
are marvels, miracles! But this was not a method, it was an idea, that
might lead to a method by which it would be possible, without changing
any other property of matter—except, in some instances colours—to lower
the refractive index of a substance, solid or liquid, to that of air—so
far as all practical purposes are concerned.”

“Phew!” said Kemp. “That’s odd! But still I don’t see quite ... I can
understand that thereby you could spoil a valuable stone, but personal
invisibility is a far cry.”

“Precisely,” said Griffin. “But consider, visibility depends on the
action of the visible bodies on light. Either a body absorbs light, or
it reflects or refracts it, or does all these things. If it neither
reflects nor refracts nor absorbs light, it cannot of itself be
visible. You see an opaque red box, for instance, because the colour
absorbs some of the light and reflects the rest, all the red part of
the light, to you. If it did not absorb any particular part of the
light, but reflected it all, then it would be a shining white box.
Silver! A diamond box would neither absorb much of the light nor
reflect much from the general surface, but just here and there where
the surfaces were favourable the light would be reflected and
refracted, so that you would get a brilliant appearance of flashing
reflections and translucencies—a sort of skeleton of light. A glass box
would not be so brilliant, nor so clearly visible, as a diamond box,
because there would be less refraction and reflection. See that? From
certain points of view you would see quite clearly through it. Some
kinds of glass would be more visible than others, a box of flint glass
would be brighter than a box of ordinary window glass. A box of very
thin common glass would be hard to see in a bad light, because it would
absorb hardly any light and refract and reflect very little. And if you
put a sheet of common white glass in water, still more if you put it in
some denser liquid than water, it would vanish almost altogether,
because light passing from water to glass is only slightly refracted or
reflected or indeed affected in any way. It is almost as invisible as a
jet of coal gas or hydrogen is in air. And for precisely the same
reason!”

“Yes,” said Kemp, “that is pretty plain sailing.”

“And here is another fact you will know to be true. If a sheet of glass
is smashed, Kemp, and beaten into a powder, it becomes much more
visible while it is in the air; it becomes at last an opaque white
powder. This is because the powdering multiplies the surfaces of the
glass at which refraction and reflection occur. In the sheet of glass
there are only two surfaces; in the powder the light is reflected or
refracted by each grain it passes through, and very little gets right
through the powder. But if the white powdered glass is put into water,
it forthwith vanishes. The powdered glass and water have much the same
refractive index; that is, the light undergoes very little refraction
or reflection in passing from one to the other.

“You make the glass invisible by putting it into a liquid of nearly the
same refractive index; a transparent thing becomes invisible if it is
put in any medium of almost the same refractive index. And if you will
consider only a second, you will see also that the powder of glass
might be made to vanish in air, if its refractive index could be made
the same as that of air; for then there would be no refraction or
reflection as the light passed from glass to air.”

“Yes, yes,” said Kemp. “But a man’s not powdered glass!”

“No,” said Griffin. “He’s more transparent!”

“Nonsense!”

“That from a doctor! How one forgets! Have you already forgotten your
physics, in ten years? Just think of all the things that are
transparent and seem not to be so. Paper, for instance, is made up of
transparent fibres, and it is white and opaque only for the same reason
that a powder of glass is white and opaque. Oil white paper, fill up
the interstices between the particles with oil so that there is no
longer refraction or reflection except at the surfaces, and it becomes
as transparent as glass. And not only paper, but cotton fibre, linen
fibre, wool fibre, woody fibre, and _bone_, Kemp, _flesh_, Kemp,
_hair_, Kemp, _nails_ and _nerves_, Kemp, in fact the whole fabric of a
man except the red of his blood and the black pigment of hair, are all
made up of transparent, colourless tissue. So little suffices to make
us visible one to the other. For the most part the fibres of a living
creature are no more opaque than water.”

“Great Heavens!” cried Kemp. “Of course, of course! I was thinking only
last night of the sea larvae and all jelly-fish!”

“_Now_ you have me! And all that I knew and had in mind a year after I
left London—six years ago. But I kept it to myself. I had to do my work
under frightful disadvantages. Oliver, my professor, was a scientific
bounder, a journalist by instinct, a thief of ideas—he was always
prying! And you know the knavish system of the scientific world. I
simply would not publish, and let him share my credit. I went on
working; I got nearer and nearer making my formula into an experiment,
a reality. I told no living soul, because I meant to flash my work upon
the world with crushing effect and become famous at a blow. I took up
the question of pigments to fill up certain gaps. And suddenly, not by
design but by accident, I made a discovery in physiology.”

“Yes?”

“You know the red colouring matter of blood; it can be made
white—colourless—and remain with all the functions it has now!”

Kemp gave a cry of incredulous amazement.

The Invisible Man rose and began pacing the little study. “You may well
exclaim. I remember that night. It was late at night—in the daytime one
was bothered with the gaping, silly students—and I worked then
sometimes till dawn. It came suddenly, splendid and complete in my
mind. I was alone; the laboratory was still, with the tall lights
burning brightly and silently. In all my great moments I have been
alone. ‘One could make an animal—a tissue—transparent! One could make
it invisible! All except the pigments—I could be invisible!’ I said,
suddenly realising what it meant to be an albino with such knowledge.
It was overwhelming. I left the filtering I was doing, and went and
stared out of the great window at the stars. ‘I could be invisible!’ I
repeated.

“To do such a thing would be to transcend magic. And I beheld,
unclouded by doubt, a magnificent vision of all that invisibility might
mean to a man—the mystery, the power, the freedom. Drawbacks I saw
none. You have only to think! And I, a shabby, poverty-struck,
hemmed-in demonstrator, teaching fools in a provincial college, might
suddenly become—this. I ask you, Kemp if _you_ ... Anyone, I tell you,
would have flung himself upon that research. And I worked three years,
and every mountain of difficulty I toiled over showed another from its
summit. The infinite details! And the exasperation! A professor, a
provincial professor, always prying. ‘When are you going to publish
this work of yours?’ was his everlasting question. And the students,
the cramped means! Three years I had of it—

“And after three years of secrecy and exasperation, I found that to
complete it was impossible—impossible.”

“How?” asked Kemp.

“Money,” said the Invisible Man, and went again to stare out of the
window.

He turned around abruptly. “I robbed the old man—robbed my father.

“The money was not his, and he shot himself.”




CHAPTER XX.
AT THE HOUSE IN GREAT PORTLAND STREET


For a moment Kemp sat in silence, staring at the back of the headless
figure at the window. Then he started, struck by a thought, rose, took
the Invisible Man’s arm, and turned him away from the outlook.

“You are tired,” he said, “and while I sit, you walk about. Have my
chair.”

He placed himself between Griffin and the nearest window.

For a space Griffin sat silent, and then he resumed abruptly:

“I had left the Chesilstowe cottage already,” he said, “when that
happened. It was last December. I had taken a room in London, a large
unfurnished room in a big ill-managed lodging-house in a slum near
Great Portland Street. The room was soon full of the appliances I had
bought with his money; the work was going on steadily, successfully,
drawing near an end. I was like a man emerging from a thicket, and
suddenly coming on some unmeaning tragedy. I went to bury him. My mind
was still on this research, and I did not lift a finger to save his
character. I remember the funeral, the cheap hearse, the scant
ceremony, the windy frost-bitten hillside, and the old college friend
of his who read the service over him—a shabby, black, bent old man with
a snivelling cold.

“I remember walking back to the empty house, through the place that had
once been a village and was now patched and tinkered by the jerry
builders into the ugly likeness of a town. Every way the roads ran out
at last into the desecrated fields and ended in rubble heaps and rank
wet weeds. I remember myself as a gaunt black figure, going along the
slippery, shiny pavement, and the strange sense of detachment I felt
from the squalid respectability, the sordid commercialism of the place.

“I did not feel a bit sorry for my father. He seemed to me to be the
victim of his own foolish sentimentality. The current cant required my
attendance at his funeral, but it was really not my affair.

“But going along the High Street, my old life came back to me for a
space, for I met the girl I had known ten years since. Our eyes met.

“Something moved me to turn back and talk to her. She was a very
ordinary person.

“It was all like a dream, that visit to the old places. I did not feel
then that I was lonely, that I had come out from the world into a
desolate place. I appreciated my loss of sympathy, but I put it down to
the general inanity of things. Re-entering my room seemed like the
recovery of reality. There were the things I knew and loved. There
stood the apparatus, the experiments arranged and waiting. And now
there was scarcely a difficulty left, beyond the planning of details.

“I will tell you, Kemp, sooner or later, all the complicated processes.
We need not go into that now. For the most part, saving certain gaps I
chose to remember, they are written in cypher in those books that tramp
has hidden. We must hunt him down. We must get those books again. But
the essential phase was to place the transparent object whose
refractive index was to be lowered between two radiating centres of a
sort of ethereal vibration, of which I will tell you more fully later.
No, not those Röntgen vibrations—I don’t know that these others of mine
have been described. Yet they are obvious enough. I needed two little
dynamos, and these I worked with a cheap gas engine. My first
experiment was with a bit of white wool fabric. It was the strangest
thing in the world to see it in the flicker of the flashes soft and
white, and then to watch it fade like a wreath of smoke and vanish.

“I could scarcely believe I had done it. I put my hand into the
emptiness, and there was the thing as solid as ever. I felt it
awkwardly, and threw it on the floor. I had a little trouble finding it
again.

“And then came a curious experience. I heard a miaow behind me, and
turning, saw a lean white cat, very dirty, on the cistern cover outside
the window. A thought came into my head. ‘Everything ready for you,’ I
said, and went to the window, opened it, and called softly. She came
in, purring—the poor beast was starving—and I gave her some milk. All
my food was in a cupboard in the corner of the room. After that she
went smelling round the room, evidently with the idea of making herself
at home. The invisible rag upset her a bit; you should have seen her
spit at it! But I made her comfortable on the pillow of my truckle-bed.
And I gave her butter to get her to wash.”

“And you processed her?”

“I processed her. But giving drugs to a cat is no joke, Kemp! And the
process failed.”

“Failed!”

“In two particulars. These were the claws and the pigment stuff, what
is it?—at the back of the eye in a cat. You know?”

“_Tapetum_.”

“Yes, the _tapetum_. It didn’t go. After I’d given the stuff to bleach
the blood and done certain other things to her, I gave the beast opium,
and put her and the pillow she was sleeping on, on the apparatus. And
after all the rest had faded and vanished, there remained two little
ghosts of her eyes.”

“Odd!”

“I can’t explain it. She was bandaged and clamped, of course—so I had
her safe; but she woke while she was still misty, and miaowed dismally,
and someone came knocking. It was an old woman from downstairs, who
suspected me of vivisecting—a drink-sodden old creature, with only a
white cat to care for in all the world. I whipped out some chloroform,
applied it, and answered the door. ‘Did I hear a cat?’ she asked. ‘My
cat?’ ‘Not here,’ said I, very politely. She was a little doubtful and
tried to peer past me into the room; strange enough to her no
doubt—bare walls, uncurtained windows, truckle-bed, with the gas engine
vibrating, and the seethe of the radiant points, and that faint ghastly
stinging of chloroform in the air. She had to be satisfied at last and
went away again.”

“How long did it take?” asked Kemp.

“Three or four hours—the cat. The bones and sinews and the fat were the
last to go, and the tips of the coloured hairs. And, as I say, the back
part of the eye, tough, iridescent stuff it is, wouldn’t go at all.

“It was night outside long before the business was over, and nothing
was to be seen but the dim eyes and the claws. I stopped the gas
engine, felt for and stroked the beast, which was still insensible, and
then, being tired, left it sleeping on the invisible pillow and went to
bed. I found it hard to sleep. I lay awake thinking weak aimless stuff,
going over the experiment over and over again, or dreaming feverishly
of things growing misty and vanishing about me, until everything, the
ground I stood on, vanished, and so I came to that sickly falling
nightmare one gets. About two, the cat began miaowing about the room. I
tried to hush it by talking to it, and then I decided to turn it out. I
remember the shock I had when striking a light—there were just the
round eyes shining green—and nothing round them. I would have given it
milk, but I hadn’t any. It wouldn’t be quiet, it just sat down and
miaowed at the door. I tried to catch it, with an idea of putting it
out of the window, but it wouldn’t be caught, it vanished. Then it
began miaowing in different parts of the room. At last I opened the
window and made a bustle. I suppose it went out at last. I never saw
any more of it.

“Then—Heaven knows why—I fell thinking of my father’s funeral again,
and the dismal windy hillside, until the day had come. I found sleeping
was hopeless, and, locking my door after me, wandered out into the
morning streets.”

“You don’t mean to say there’s an invisible cat at large!” said Kemp.

“If it hasn’t been killed,” said the Invisible Man. “Why not?”

“Why not?” said Kemp. “I didn’t mean to interrupt.”

“It’s very probably been killed,” said the Invisible Man. “It was alive
four days after, I know, and down a grating in Great Titchfield Street;
because I saw a crowd round the place, trying to see whence the
miaowing came.”

He was silent for the best part of a minute. Then he resumed abruptly:

“I remember that morning before the change very vividly. I must have
gone up Great Portland Street. I remember the barracks in Albany
Street, and the horse soldiers coming out, and at last I found the
summit of Primrose Hill. It was a sunny day in January—one of those
sunny, frosty days that came before the snow this year. My weary brain
tried to formulate the position, to plot out a plan of action.

“I was surprised to find, now that my prize was within my grasp, how
inconclusive its attainment seemed. As a matter of fact I was worked
out; the intense stress of nearly four years’ continuous work left me
incapable of any strength of feeling. I was apathetic, and I tried in
vain to recover the enthusiasm of my first inquiries, the passion of
discovery that had enabled me to compass even the downfall of my
father’s grey hairs. Nothing seemed to matter. I saw pretty clearly
this was a transient mood, due to overwork and want of sleep, and that
either by drugs or rest it would be possible to recover my energies.

“All I could think clearly was that the thing had to be carried
through; the fixed idea still ruled me. And soon, for the money I had
was almost exhausted. I looked about me at the hillside, with children
playing and girls watching them, and tried to think of all the
fantastic advantages an invisible man would have in the world. After a
time I crawled home, took some food and a strong dose of strychnine,
and went to sleep in my clothes on my unmade bed. Strychnine is a grand
tonic, Kemp, to take the flabbiness out of a man.”

“It’s the devil,” said Kemp. “It’s the palaeolithic in a bottle.”

“I awoke vastly invigorated and rather irritable. You know?”

“I know the stuff.”

“And there was someone rapping at the door. It was my landlord with
threats and inquiries, an old Polish Jew in a long grey coat and greasy
slippers. I had been tormenting a cat in the night, he was sure—the old
woman’s tongue had been busy. He insisted on knowing all about it. The
laws in this country against vivisection were very severe—he might be
liable. I denied the cat. Then the vibration of the little gas engine
could be felt all over the house, he said. That was true, certainly. He
edged round me into the room, peering about over his German-silver
spectacles, and a sudden dread came into my mind that he might carry
away something of my secret. I tried to keep between him and the
concentrating apparatus I had arranged, and that only made him more
curious. What was I doing? Why was I always alone and secretive? Was it
legal? Was it dangerous? I paid nothing but the usual rent. His had
always been a most respectable house—in a disreputable neighbourhood.
Suddenly my temper gave way. I told him to get out. He began to
protest, to jabber of his right of entry. In a moment I had him by the
collar; something ripped, and he went spinning out into his own
passage. I slammed and locked the door and sat down quivering.

“He made a fuss outside, which I disregarded, and after a time he went
away.

“But this brought matters to a crisis. I did not know what he would do,
nor even what he had the power to do. To move to fresh apartments would
have meant delay; altogether I had barely twenty pounds left in the
world, for the most part in a bank—and I could not afford that. Vanish!
It was irresistible. Then there would be an inquiry, the sacking of my
room.

“At the thought of the possibility of my work being exposed or
interrupted at its very climax, I became very angry and active. I
hurried out with my three books of notes, my cheque-book—the tramp has
them now—and directed them from the nearest Post Office to a house of
call for letters and parcels in Great Portland Street. I tried to go
out noiselessly. Coming in, I found my landlord going quietly upstairs;
he had heard the door close, I suppose. You would have laughed to see
him jump aside on the landing as I came tearing after him. He glared at
me as I went by him, and I made the house quiver with the slamming of
my door. I heard him come shuffling up to my floor, hesitate, and go
down. I set to work upon my preparations forthwith.

“It was all done that evening and night. While I was still sitting
under the sickly, drowsy influence of the drugs that decolourise blood,
there came a repeated knocking at the door. It ceased, footsteps went
away and returned, and the knocking was resumed. There was an attempt
to push something under the door—a blue paper. Then in a fit of
irritation I rose and went and flung the door wide open. ‘Now then?’
said I.

“It was my landlord, with a notice of ejectment or something. He held
it out to me, saw something odd about my hands, I expect, and lifted
his eyes to my face.

“For a moment he gaped. Then he gave a sort of inarticulate cry,
dropped candle and writ together, and went blundering down the dark
passage to the stairs. I shut the door, locked it, and went to the
looking-glass. Then I understood his terror.... My face was white—like
white stone.

“But it was all horrible. I had not expected the suffering. A night of
racking anguish, sickness and fainting. I set my teeth, though my skin
was presently afire, all my body afire; but I lay there like grim
death. I understood now how it was the cat had howled until I
chloroformed it. Lucky it was I lived alone and untended in my room.
There were times when I sobbed and groaned and talked. But I stuck to
it.... I became insensible and woke languid in the darkness.

“The pain had passed. I thought I was killing myself and I did not
care. I shall never forget that dawn, and the strange horror of seeing
that my hands had become as clouded glass, and watching them grow
clearer and thinner as the day went by, until at last I could see the
sickly disorder of my room through them, though I closed my transparent
eyelids. My limbs became glassy, the bones and arteries faded,
vanished, and the little white nerves went last. I gritted my teeth and
stayed there to the end. At last only the dead tips of the fingernails
remained, pallid and white, and the brown stain of some acid upon my
fingers.

“I struggled up. At first I was as incapable as a swathed
infant—stepping with limbs I could not see. I was weak and very hungry.
I went and stared at nothing in my shaving-glass, at nothing save where
an attenuated pigment still remained behind the retina of my eyes,
fainter than mist. I had to hang on to the table and press my forehead
against the glass.

“It was only by a frantic effort of will that I dragged myself back to
the apparatus and completed the process.

“I slept during the forenoon, pulling the sheet over my eyes to shut
out the light, and about midday I was awakened again by a knocking. My
strength had returned. I sat up and listened and heard a whispering. I
sprang to my feet and as noiselessly as possible began to detach the
connections of my apparatus, and to distribute it about the room, so as
to destroy the suggestions of its arrangement. Presently the knocking
was renewed and voices called, first my landlord’s, and then two
others. To gain time I answered them. The invisible rag and pillow came
to hand and I opened the window and pitched them out on to the cistern
cover. As the window opened, a heavy crash came at the door. Someone
had charged it with the idea of smashing the lock. But the stout bolts
I had screwed up some days before stopped him. That startled me, made
me angry. I began to tremble and do things hurriedly.

“I tossed together some loose paper, straw, packing paper and so forth,
in the middle of the room, and turned on the gas. Heavy blows began to
rain upon the door. I could not find the matches. I beat my hands on
the wall with rage. I turned down the gas again, stepped out of the
window on the cistern cover, very softly lowered the sash, and sat
down, secure and invisible, but quivering with anger, to watch events.
They split a panel, I saw, and in another moment they had broken away
the staples of the bolts and stood in the open doorway. It was the
landlord and his two step-sons, sturdy young men of three or four and
twenty. Behind them fluttered the old hag of a woman from downstairs.

“You may imagine their astonishment to find the room empty. One of the
younger men rushed to the window at once, flung it up and stared out.
His staring eyes and thick-lipped bearded face came a foot from my
face. I was half minded to hit his silly countenance, but I arrested my
doubled fist. He stared right through me. So did the others as they
joined him. The old man went and peered under the bed, and then they
all made a rush for the cupboard. They had to argue about it at length
in Yiddish and Cockney English. They concluded I had not answered them,
that their imagination had deceived them. A feeling of extraordinary
elation took the place of my anger as I sat outside the window and
watched these four people—for the old lady came in, glancing
suspiciously about her like a cat, trying to understand the riddle of
my behaviour.

“The old man, so far as I could understand his _patois_, agreed with
the old lady that I was a vivisectionist. The sons protested in garbled
English that I was an electrician, and appealed to the dynamos and
radiators. They were all nervous about my arrival, although I found
subsequently that they had bolted the front door. The old lady peered
into the cupboard and under the bed, and one of the young men pushed up
the register and stared up the chimney. One of my fellow lodgers, a
coster-monger who shared the opposite room with a butcher, appeared on
the landing, and he was called in and told incoherent things.

“It occurred to me that the radiators, if they fell into the hands of
some acute well-educated person, would give me away too much, and
watching my opportunity, I came into the room and tilted one of the
little dynamos off its fellow on which it was standing, and smashed
both apparatus. Then, while they were trying to explain the smash, I
dodged out of the room and went softly downstairs.

“I went into one of the sitting-rooms and waited until they came down,
still speculating and argumentative, all a little disappointed at
finding no ‘horrors,’ and all a little puzzled how they stood legally
towards me. Then I slipped up again with a box of matches, fired my
heap of paper and rubbish, put the chairs and bedding thereby, led the
gas to the affair, by means of an india-rubber tube, and waving a
farewell to the room left it for the last time.”

“You fired the house!” exclaimed Kemp.

“Fired the house. It was the only way to cover my trail—and no doubt it
was insured. I slipped the bolts of the front door quietly and went out
into the street. I was invisible, and I was only just beginning to
realise the extraordinary advantage my invisibility gave me. My head
was already teeming with plans of all the wild and wonderful things I
had now impunity to do.”




CHAPTER XXI.
IN OXFORD STREET


“In going downstairs the first time I found an unexpected difficulty
because I could not see my feet; indeed I stumbled twice, and there was
an unaccustomed clumsiness in gripping the bolt. By not looking down,
however, I managed to walk on the level passably well.

“My mood, I say, was one of exaltation. I felt as a seeing man might
do, with padded feet and noiseless clothes, in a city of the blind. I
experienced a wild impulse to jest, to startle people, to clap men on
the back, fling people’s hats astray, and generally revel in my
extraordinary advantage.

“But hardly had I emerged upon Great Portland Street, however (my
lodging was close to the big draper’s shop there), when I heard a
clashing concussion and was hit violently behind, and turning saw a man
carrying a basket of soda-water syphons, and looking in amazement at
his burden. Although the blow had really hurt me, I found something so
irresistible in his astonishment that I laughed aloud. ‘The devil’s in
the basket,’ I said, and suddenly twisted it out of his hand. He let go
incontinently, and I swung the whole weight into the air.

“But a fool of a cabman, standing outside a public house, made a sudden
rush for this, and his extending fingers took me with excruciating
violence under the ear. I let the whole down with a smash on the
cabman, and then, with shouts and the clatter of feet about me, people
coming out of shops, vehicles pulling up, I realised what I had done
for myself, and cursing my folly, backed against a shop window and
prepared to dodge out of the confusion. In a moment I should be wedged
into a crowd and inevitably discovered. I pushed by a butcher boy, who
luckily did not turn to see the nothingness that shoved him aside, and
dodged behind the cab-man’s four-wheeler. I do not know how they
settled the business. I hurried straight across the road, which was
happily clear, and hardly heeding which way I went, in the fright of
detection the incident had given me, plunged into the afternoon throng
of Oxford Street.

“I tried to get into the stream of people, but they were too thick for
me, and in a moment my heels were being trodden upon. I took to the
gutter, the roughness of which I found painful to my feet, and
forthwith the shaft of a crawling hansom dug me forcibly under the
shoulder blade, reminding me that I was already bruised severely. I
staggered out of the way of the cab, avoided a perambulator by a
convulsive movement, and found myself behind the hansom. A happy
thought saved me, and as this drove slowly along I followed in its
immediate wake, trembling and astonished at the turn of my adventure.
And not only trembling, but shivering. It was a bright day in January
and I was stark naked and the thin slime of mud that covered the road
was freezing. Foolish as it seems to me now, I had not reckoned that,
transparent or not, I was still amenable to the weather and all its
consequences.

“Then suddenly a bright idea came into my head. I ran round and got
into the cab. And so, shivering, scared, and sniffing with the first
intimations of a cold, and with the bruises in the small of my back
growing upon my attention, I drove slowly along Oxford Street and past
Tottenham Court Road. My mood was as different from that in which I had
sallied forth ten minutes ago as it is possible to imagine. This
invisibility indeed! The one thought that possessed me was—how was I to
get out of the scrape I was in.

“We crawled past Mudie’s, and there a tall woman with five or six
yellow-labelled books hailed my cab, and I sprang out just in time to
escape her, shaving a railway van narrowly in my flight. I made off up
the roadway to Bloomsbury Square, intending to strike north past the
Museum and so get into the quiet district. I was now cruelly chilled,
and the strangeness of my situation so unnerved me that I whimpered as
I ran. At the northward corner of the Square a little white dog ran out
of the Pharmaceutical Society’s offices, and incontinently made for me,
nose down.

“I had never realised it before, but the nose is to the mind of a dog
what the eye is to the mind of a seeing man. Dogs perceive the scent of
a man moving as men perceive his vision. This brute began barking and
leaping, showing, as it seemed to me, only too plainly that he was
aware of me. I crossed Great Russell Street, glancing over my shoulder
as I did so, and went some way along Montague Street before I realised
what I was running towards.

“Then I became aware of a blare of music, and looking along the street
saw a number of people advancing out of Russell Square, red shirts, and
the banner of the Salvation Army to the fore. Such a crowd, chanting in
the roadway and scoffing on the pavement, I could not hope to
penetrate, and dreading to go back and farther from home again, and
deciding on the spur of the moment, I ran up the white steps of a house
facing the museum railings, and stood there until the crowd should have
passed. Happily the dog stopped at the noise of the band too,
hesitated, and turned tail, running back to Bloomsbury Square again.

“On came the band, bawling with unconscious irony some hymn about ‘When
shall we see His face?’ and it seemed an interminable time to me before
the tide of the crowd washed along the pavement by me. Thud, thud,
thud, came the drum with a vibrating resonance, and for the moment I
did not notice two urchins stopping at the railings by me. ‘See ’em,’
said one. ‘See what?’ said the other. ‘Why—them footmarks—bare. Like
what you makes in mud.’

“I looked down and saw the youngsters had stopped and were gaping at
the muddy footmarks I had left behind me up the newly whitened steps.
The passing people elbowed and jostled them, but their confounded
intelligence was arrested. ‘Thud, thud, thud, when, thud, shall we see,
thud, his face, thud, thud.’ ‘There’s a barefoot man gone up them
steps, or I don’t know nothing,’ said one. ‘And he ain’t never come
down again. And his foot was a-bleeding.’

“The thick of the crowd had already passed. ‘Looky there, Ted,’ quoth
the younger of the detectives, with the sharpness of surprise in his
voice, and pointed straight to my feet. I looked down and saw at once
the dim suggestion of their outline sketched in splashes of mud. For a
moment I was paralysed.

“‘Why, that’s rum,’ said the elder. ‘Dashed rum! It’s just like the
ghost of a foot, ain’t it?’ He hesitated and advanced with outstretched
hand. A man pulled up short to see what he was catching, and then a
girl. In another moment he would have touched me. Then I saw what to
do. I made a step, the boy started back with an exclamation, and with a
rapid movement I swung myself over into the portico of the next house.
But the smaller boy was sharp-eyed enough to follow the movement, and
before I was well down the steps and upon the pavement, he had
recovered from his momentary astonishment and was shouting out that the
feet had gone over the wall.

“They rushed round and saw my new footmarks flash into being on the
lower step and upon the pavement. ‘What’s up?’ asked someone. ‘Feet!
Look! Feet running!’

“Everybody in the road, except my three pursuers, was pouring along
after the Salvation Army, and this blow not only impeded me but them.
There was an eddy of surprise and interrogation. At the cost of bowling
over one young fellow I got through, and in another moment I was
rushing headlong round the circuit of Russell Square, with six or seven
astonished people following my footmarks. There was no time for
explanation, or else the whole host would have been after me.

“Twice I doubled round corners, thrice I crossed the road and came back
upon my tracks, and then, as my feet grew hot and dry, the damp
impressions began to fade. At last I had a breathing space and rubbed
my feet clean with my hands, and so got away altogether. The last I saw
of the chase was a little group of a dozen people perhaps, studying
with infinite perplexity a slowly drying footprint that had resulted
from a puddle in Tavistock Square, a footprint as isolated and
incomprehensible to them as Crusoe’s solitary discovery.

“This running warmed me to a certain extent, and I went on with a
better courage through the maze of less frequented roads that runs
hereabouts. My back had now become very stiff and sore, my tonsils were
painful from the cabman’s fingers, and the skin of my neck had been
scratched by his nails; my feet hurt exceedingly and I was lame from a
little cut on one foot. I saw in time a blind man approaching me, and
fled limping, for I feared his subtle intuitions. Once or twice
accidental collisions occurred and I left people amazed, with
unaccountable curses ringing in their ears. Then came something silent
and quiet against my face, and across the Square fell a thin veil of
slowly falling flakes of snow. I had caught a cold, and do as I would I
could not avoid an occasional sneeze. And every dog that came in sight,
with its pointing nose and curious sniffing, was a terror to me.

“Then came men and boys running, first one and then others, and
shouting as they ran. It was a fire. They ran in the direction of my
lodging, and looking back down a street I saw a mass of black smoke
streaming up above the roofs and telephone wires. It was my lodging
burning; my clothes, my apparatus, all my resources indeed, except my
cheque-book and the three volumes of memoranda that awaited me in Great
Portland Street, were there. Burning! I had burnt my boats—if ever a
man did! The place was blazing.”

The Invisible Man paused and thought. Kemp glanced nervously out of the
window. “Yes?” he said. “Go on.”




CHAPTER XXII.
IN THE EMPORIUM


“So last January, with the beginning of a snowstorm in the air about
me—and if it settled on me it would betray me!—weary, cold, painful,
inexpressibly wretched, and still but half convinced of my invisible
quality, I began this new life to which I am committed. I had no
refuge, no appliances, no human being in the world in whom I could
confide. To have told my secret would have given me away—made a mere
show and rarity of me. Nevertheless, I was half-minded to accost some
passer-by and throw myself upon his mercy. But I knew too clearly the
terror and brutal cruelty my advances would evoke. I made no plans in
the street. My sole object was to get shelter from the snow, to get
myself covered and warm; then I might hope to plan. But even to me, an
Invisible Man, the rows of London houses stood latched, barred, and
bolted impregnably.

“Only one thing could I see clearly before me—the cold exposure and
misery of the snowstorm and the night.

“And then I had a brilliant idea. I turned down one of the roads
leading from Gower Street to Tottenham Court Road, and found myself
outside Omniums, the big establishment where everything is to be
bought—you know the place: meat, grocery, linen, furniture, clothing,
oil paintings even—a huge meandering collection of shops rather than a
shop. I had thought I should find the doors open, but they were closed,
and as I stood in the wide entrance a carriage stopped outside, and a
man in uniform—you know the kind of personage with ‘Omnium’ on his
cap—flung open the door. I contrived to enter, and walking down the
shop—it was a department where they were selling ribbons and gloves and
stockings and that kind of thing—came to a more spacious region devoted
to picnic baskets and wicker furniture.

“I did not feel safe there, however; people were going to and fro, and
I prowled restlessly about until I came upon a huge section in an upper
floor containing multitudes of bedsteads, and over these I clambered,
and found a resting-place at last among a huge pile of folded flock
mattresses. The place was already lit up and agreeably warm, and I
decided to remain where I was, keeping a cautious eye on the two or
three sets of shopmen and customers who were meandering through the
place, until closing time came. Then I should be able, I thought, to
rob the place for food and clothing, and disguised, prowl through it
and examine its resources, perhaps sleep on some of the bedding. That
seemed an acceptable plan. My idea was to procure clothing to make
myself a muffled but acceptable figure, to get money, and then to
recover my books and parcels where they awaited me, take a lodging
somewhere and elaborate plans for the complete realisation of the
advantages my invisibility gave me (as I still imagined) over my
fellow-men.

“Closing time arrived quickly enough. It could not have been more than
an hour after I took up my position on the mattresses before I noticed
the blinds of the windows being drawn, and customers being marched
doorward. And then a number of brisk young men began with remarkable
alacrity to tidy up the goods that remained disturbed. I left my lair
as the crowds diminished, and prowled cautiously out into the less
desolate parts of the shop. I was really surprised to observe how
rapidly the young men and women whipped away the goods displayed for
sale during the day. All the boxes of goods, the hanging fabrics, the
festoons of lace, the boxes of sweets in the grocery section, the
displays of this and that, were being whipped down, folded up, slapped
into tidy receptacles, and everything that could not be taken down and
put away had sheets of some coarse stuff like sacking flung over them.
Finally all the chairs were turned up on to the counters, leaving the
floor clear. Directly each of these young people had done, he or she
made promptly for the door with such an expression of animation as I
have rarely observed in a shop assistant before. Then came a lot of
youngsters scattering sawdust and carrying pails and brooms. I had to
dodge to get out of the way, and as it was, my ankle got stung with the
sawdust. For some time, wandering through the swathed and darkened
departments, I could hear the brooms at work. And at last a good hour
or more after the shop had been closed, came a noise of locking doors.
Silence came upon the place, and I found myself wandering through the
vast and intricate shops, galleries, show-rooms of the place, alone. It
was very still; in one place I remember passing near one of the
Tottenham Court Road entrances and listening to the tapping of
boot-heels of the passers-by.

“My first visit was to the place where I had seen stockings and gloves
for sale. It was dark, and I had the devil of a hunt after matches,
which I found at last in the drawer of the little cash desk. Then I had
to get a candle. I had to tear down wrappings and ransack a number of
boxes and drawers, but at last I managed to turn out what I sought; the
box label called them lambswool pants, and lambswool vests. Then socks,
a thick comforter, and then I went to the clothing place and got
trousers, a lounge jacket, an overcoat and a slouch hat—a clerical sort
of hat with the brim turned down. I began to feel a human being again,
and my next thought was food.

“Upstairs was a refreshment department, and there I got cold meat.
There was coffee still in the urn, and I lit the gas and warmed it up
again, and altogether I did not do badly. Afterwards, prowling through
the place in search of blankets—I had to put up at last with a heap of
down quilts—I came upon a grocery section with a lot of chocolate and
candied fruits, more than was good for me indeed—and some white
burgundy. And near that was a toy department, and I had a brilliant
idea. I found some artificial noses—dummy noses, you know, and I
thought of dark spectacles. But Omniums had no optical department. My
nose had been a difficulty indeed—I had thought of paint. But the
discovery set my mind running on wigs and masks and the like. Finally I
went to sleep in a heap of down quilts, very warm and comfortable.

“My last thoughts before sleeping were the most agreeable I had had
since the change. I was in a state of physical serenity, and that was
reflected in my mind. I thought that I should be able to slip out
unobserved in the morning with my clothes upon me, muffling my face
with a white wrapper I had taken, purchase, with the money I had taken,
spectacles and so forth, and so complete my disguise. I lapsed into
disorderly dreams of all the fantastic things that had happened during
the last few days. I saw the ugly little Jew of a landlord vociferating
in his rooms; I saw his two sons marvelling, and the wrinkled old
woman’s gnarled face as she asked for her cat. I experienced again the
strange sensation of seeing the cloth disappear, and so I came round to
the windy hillside and the sniffing old clergyman mumbling ‘Earth to
earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust,’ at my father’s open grave.

“‘You also,’ said a voice, and suddenly I was being forced towards the
grave. I struggled, shouted, appealed to the mourners, but they
continued stonily following the service; the old clergyman, too, never
faltered droning and sniffing through the ritual. I realised I was
invisible and inaudible, that overwhelming forces had their grip on me.
I struggled in vain, I was forced over the brink, the coffin rang
hollow as I fell upon it, and the gravel came flying after me in
spadefuls. Nobody heeded me, nobody was aware of me. I made convulsive
struggles and awoke.

“The pale London dawn had come, the place was full of a chilly grey
light that filtered round the edges of the window blinds. I sat up, and
for a time I could not think where this ample apartment, with its
counters, its piles of rolled stuff, its heap of quilts and cushions,
its iron pillars, might be. Then, as recollection came back to me, I
heard voices in conversation.

“Then far down the place, in the brighter light of some department
which had already raised its blinds, I saw two men approaching. I
scrambled to my feet, looking about me for some way of escape, and even
as I did so the sound of my movement made them aware of me. I suppose
they saw merely a figure moving quietly and quickly away. ‘Who’s that?’
cried one, and ‘Stop there!’ shouted the other. I dashed around a
corner and came full tilt—a faceless figure, mind you!—on a lanky lad
of fifteen. He yelled and I bowled him over, rushed past him, turned
another corner, and by a happy inspiration threw myself behind a
counter. In another moment feet went running past and I heard voices
shouting, ‘All hands to the doors!’ asking what was ‘up,’ and giving
one another advice how to catch me.

“Lying on the ground, I felt scared out of my wits. But—odd as it may
seem—it did not occur to me at the moment to take off my clothes as I
should have done. I had made up my mind, I suppose, to get away in
them, and that ruled me. And then down the vista of the counters came a
bawling of ‘Here he is!’

“I sprang to my feet, whipped a chair off the counter, and sent it
whirling at the fool who had shouted, turned, came into another round a
corner, sent him spinning, and rushed up the stairs. He kept his
footing, gave a view hallo, and came up the staircase hot after me. Up
the staircase were piled a multitude of those bright-coloured pot
things—what are they?”

“Art pots,” suggested Kemp.

“That’s it! Art pots. Well, I turned at the top step and swung round,
plucked one out of a pile and smashed it on his silly head as he came
at me. The whole pile of pots went headlong, and I heard shouting and
footsteps running from all parts. I made a mad rush for the refreshment
place, and there was a man in white like a man cook, who took up the
chase. I made one last desperate turn and found myself among lamps and
ironmongery. I went behind the counter of this, and waited for my cook,
and as he bolted in at the head of the chase, I doubled him up with a
lamp. Down he went, and I crouched down behind the counter and began
whipping off my clothes as fast as I could. Coat, jacket, trousers,
shoes were all right, but a lambswool vest fits a man like a skin. I
heard more men coming, my cook was lying quiet on the other side of the
counter, stunned or scared speechless, and I had to make another dash
for it, like a rabbit hunted out of a wood-pile.

“‘This way, policeman!’ I heard someone shouting. I found myself in my
bedstead storeroom again, and at the end of a wilderness of wardrobes.
I rushed among them, went flat, got rid of my vest after infinite
wriggling, and stood a free man again, panting and scared, as the
policeman and three of the shopmen came round the corner. They made a
rush for the vest and pants, and collared the trousers. ‘He’s dropping
his plunder,’ said one of the young men. ‘He _must_ be somewhere here.’

“But they did not find me all the same.

“I stood watching them hunt for me for a time, and cursing my ill-luck
in losing the clothes. Then I went into the refreshment-room, drank a
little milk I found there, and sat down by the fire to consider my
position.

“In a little while two assistants came in and began to talk over the
business very excitedly and like the fools they were. I heard a
magnified account of my depredations, and other speculations as to my
whereabouts. Then I fell to scheming again. The insurmountable
difficulty of the place, especially now it was alarmed, was to get any
plunder out of it. I went down into the warehouse to see if there was
any chance of packing and addressing a parcel, but I could not
understand the system of checking. About eleven o’clock, the snow
having thawed as it fell, and the day being finer and a little warmer
than the previous one, I decided that the Emporium was hopeless, and
went out again, exasperated at my want of success, with only the
vaguest plans of action in my mind.”




CHAPTER XXIII.
IN DRURY LANE


“But you begin now to realise,” said the Invisible Man, “the full
disadvantage of my condition. I had no shelter—no covering—to get
clothing was to forego all my advantage, to make myself a strange and
terrible thing. I was fasting; for to eat, to fill myself with
unassimilated matter, would be to become grotesquely visible again.”

“I never thought of that,” said Kemp.

“Nor had I. And the snow had warned me of other dangers. I could not go
abroad in snow—it would settle on me and expose me. Rain, too, would
make me a watery outline, a glistening surface of a man—a bubble. And
fog—I should be like a fainter bubble in a fog, a surface, a greasy
glimmer of humanity. Moreover, as I went abroad—in the London air—I
gathered dirt about my ankles, floating smuts and dust upon my skin. I
did not know how long it would be before I should become visible from
that cause also. But I saw clearly it could not be for long.

“Not in London at any rate.

“I went into the slums towards Great Portland Street, and found myself
at the end of the street in which I had lodged. I did not go that way,
because of the crowd halfway down it opposite to the still smoking
ruins of the house I had fired. My most immediate problem was to get
clothing. What to do with my face puzzled me. Then I saw in one of
those little miscellaneous shops—news, sweets, toys, stationery,
belated Christmas tomfoolery, and so forth—an array of masks and noses.
I realised that problem was solved. In a flash I saw my course. I
turned about, no longer aimless, and went—circuitously in order to
avoid the busy ways, towards the back streets north of the Strand; for
I remembered, though not very distinctly where, that some theatrical
costumiers had shops in that district.

“The day was cold, with a nipping wind down the northward running
streets. I walked fast to avoid being overtaken. Every crossing was a
danger, every passenger a thing to watch alertly. One man as I was
about to pass him at the top of Bedford Street, turned upon me abruptly
and came into me, sending me into the road and almost under the wheel
of a passing hansom. The verdict of the cab-rank was that he had had
some sort of stroke. I was so unnerved by this encounter that I went
into Covent Garden Market and sat down for some time in a quiet corner
by a stall of violets, panting and trembling. I found I had caught a
fresh cold, and had to turn out after a time lest my sneezes should
attract attention.

“At last I reached the object of my quest, a dirty, fly-blown little
shop in a by-way near Drury Lane, with a window full of tinsel robes,
sham jewels, wigs, slippers, dominoes and theatrical photographs. The
shop was old-fashioned and low and dark, and the house rose above it
for four storeys, dark and dismal. I peered through the window and,
seeing no one within, entered. The opening of the door set a clanking
bell ringing. I left it open, and walked round a bare costume stand,
into a corner behind a cheval glass. For a minute or so no one came.
Then I heard heavy feet striding across a room, and a man appeared down
the shop.

“My plans were now perfectly definite. I proposed to make my way into
the house, secrete myself upstairs, watch my opportunity, and when
everything was quiet, rummage out a wig, mask, spectacles, and costume,
and go into the world, perhaps a grotesque but still a credible figure.
And incidentally of course I could rob the house of any available
money.

“The man who had just entered the shop was a short, slight, hunched,
beetle-browed man, with long arms and very short bandy legs. Apparently
I had interrupted a meal. He stared about the shop with an expression
of expectation. This gave way to surprise, and then to anger, as he saw
the shop empty. ‘Damn the boys!’ he said. He went to stare up and down
the street. He came in again in a minute, kicked the door to with his
foot spitefully, and went muttering back to the house door.

“I came forward to follow him, and at the noise of my movement he
stopped dead. I did so too, startled by his quickness of ear. He
slammed the house door in my face.

“I stood hesitating. Suddenly I heard his quick footsteps returning,
and the door reopened. He stood looking about the shop like one who was
still not satisfied. Then, murmuring to himself, he examined the back
of the counter and peered behind some fixtures. Then he stood doubtful.
He had left the house door open and I slipped into the inner room.

“It was a queer little room, poorly furnished and with a number of big
masks in the corner. On the table was his belated breakfast, and it was
a confoundedly exasperating thing for me, Kemp, to have to sniff his
coffee and stand watching while he came in and resumed his meal. And
his table manners were irritating. Three doors opened into the little
room, one going upstairs and one down, but they were all shut. I could
not get out of the room while he was there; I could scarcely move
because of his alertness, and there was a draught down my back. Twice I
strangled a sneeze just in time.

“The spectacular quality of my sensations was curious and novel, but
for all that I was heartily tired and angry long before he had done his
eating. But at last he made an end and putting his beggarly crockery on
the black tin tray upon which he had had his teapot, and gathering all
the crumbs up on the mustard stained cloth, he took the whole lot of
things after him. His burden prevented his shutting the door behind
him—as he would have done; I never saw such a man for shutting
doors—and I followed him into a very dirty underground kitchen and
scullery. I had the pleasure of seeing him begin to wash up, and then,
finding no good in keeping down there, and the brick floor being cold
on my feet, I returned upstairs and sat in his chair by the fire. It
was burning low, and scarcely thinking, I put on a little coal. The
noise of this brought him up at once, and he stood aglare. He peered
about the room and was within an ace of touching me. Even after that
examination, he scarcely seemed satisfied. He stopped in the doorway
and took a final inspection before he went down.

“I waited in the little parlour for an age, and at last he came up and
opened the upstairs door. I just managed to get by him.

“On the staircase he stopped suddenly, so that I very nearly blundered
into him. He stood looking back right into my face and listening. ‘I
could have sworn,’ he said. His long hairy hand pulled at his lower
lip. His eye went up and down the staircase. Then he grunted and went
on up again.

“His hand was on the handle of a door, and then he stopped again with
the same puzzled anger on his face. He was becoming aware of the faint
sounds of my movements about him. The man must have had diabolically
acute hearing. He suddenly flashed into rage. ‘If there’s anyone in
this house—’ he cried with an oath, and left the threat unfinished. He
put his hand in his pocket, failed to find what he wanted, and rushing
past me went blundering noisily and pugnaciously downstairs. But I did
not follow him. I sat on the head of the staircase until his return.

“Presently he came up again, still muttering. He opened the door of the
room, and before I could enter, slammed it in my face.

“I resolved to explore the house, and spent some time in doing so as
noiselessly as possible. The house was very old and tumble-down, damp
so that the paper in the attics was peeling from the walls, and rat
infested. Some of the door handles were stiff and I was afraid to turn
them. Several rooms I did inspect were unfurnished, and others were
littered with theatrical lumber, bought second-hand, I judged, from its
appearance. In one room next to his I found a lot of old clothes. I
began routing among these, and in my eagerness forgot again the evident
sharpness of his ears. I heard a stealthy footstep and, looking up just
in time, saw him peering in at the tumbled heap and holding an
old-fashioned revolver in his hand. I stood perfectly still while he
stared about open-mouthed and suspicious. ‘It must have been her,’ he
said slowly. ‘Damn her!’

“He shut the door quietly, and immediately I heard the key turn in the
lock. Then his footsteps retreated. I realised abruptly that I was
locked in. For a minute I did not know what to do. I walked from door
to window and back, and stood perplexed. A gust of anger came upon me.
But I decided to inspect the clothes before I did anything further, and
my first attempt brought down a pile from an upper shelf. This brought
him back, more sinister than ever. That time he actually touched me,
jumped back with amazement and stood astonished in the middle of the
room.

“Presently he calmed a little. ‘Rats,’ he said in an undertone, fingers
on lips. He was evidently a little scared. I edged quietly out of the
room, but a plank creaked. Then the infernal little brute started going
all over the house, revolver in hand and locking door after door and
pocketing the keys. When I realised what he was up to I had a fit of
rage—I could hardly control myself sufficiently to watch my
opportunity. By this time I knew he was alone in the house, and so I
made no more ado, but knocked him on the head.”

“Knocked him on the head?” exclaimed Kemp.

“Yes—stunned him—as he was going downstairs. Hit him from behind with a
stool that stood on the landing. He went downstairs like a bag of old
boots.”

“But—I say! The common conventions of humanity—”

“Are all very well for common people. But the point was, Kemp, that I
had to get out of that house in a disguise without his seeing me. I
couldn’t think of any other way of doing it. And then I gagged him with
a Louis Quatorze vest and tied him up in a sheet.”

“Tied him up in a sheet!”

“Made a sort of bag of it. It was rather a good idea to keep the idiot
scared and quiet, and a devilish hard thing to get out of—head away
from the string. My dear Kemp, it’s no good your sitting glaring as
though I was a murderer. It had to be done. He had his revolver. If
once he saw me he would be able to describe me—”

“But still,” said Kemp, “in England—to-day. And the man was in his own
house, and you were—well, robbing.”

“Robbing! Confound it! You’ll call me a thief next! Surely, Kemp,
you’re not fool enough to dance on the old strings. Can’t you see my
position?”

“And his too,” said Kemp.

The Invisible Man stood up sharply. “What do you mean to say?”

Kemp’s face grew a trifle hard. He was about to speak and checked
himself. “I suppose, after all,” he said with a sudden change of
manner, “the thing had to be done. You were in a fix. But still—”

“Of course I was in a fix—an infernal fix. And he made me wild
too—hunting me about the house, fooling about with his revolver,
locking and unlocking doors. He was simply exasperating. You don’t
blame me, do you? You don’t blame me?”

“I never blame anyone,” said Kemp. “It’s quite out of fashion. What did
you do next?”

“I was hungry. Downstairs I found a loaf and some rank cheese—more than
sufficient to satisfy my hunger. I took some brandy and water, and then
went up past my impromptu bag—he was lying quite still—to the room
containing the old clothes. This looked out upon the street, two lace
curtains brown with dirt guarding the window. I went and peered out
through their interstices. Outside the day was bright—by contrast with
the brown shadows of the dismal house in which I found myself,
dazzlingly bright. A brisk traffic was going by, fruit carts, a hansom,
a four-wheeler with a pile of boxes, a fishmonger’s cart. I turned with
spots of colour swimming before my eyes to the shadowy fixtures behind
me. My excitement was giving place to a clear apprehension of my
position again. The room was full of a faint scent of benzoline, used,
I suppose, in cleaning the garments.

“I began a systematic search of the place. I should judge the hunchback
had been alone in the house for some time. He was a curious person.
Everything that could possibly be of service to me I collected in the
clothes storeroom, and then I made a deliberate selection. I found a
handbag I thought a suitable possession, and some powder, rouge, and
sticking-plaster.

“I had thought of painting and powdering my face and all that there was
to show of me, in order to render myself visible, but the disadvantage
of this lay in the fact that I should require turpentine and other
appliances and a considerable amount of time before I could vanish
again. Finally I chose a mask of the better type, slightly grotesque
but not more so than many human beings, dark glasses, greyish whiskers,
and a wig. I could find no underclothing, but that I could buy
subsequently, and for the time I swathed myself in calico dominoes and
some white cashmere scarfs. I could find no socks, but the hunchback’s
boots were rather a loose fit and sufficed. In a desk in the shop were
three sovereigns and about thirty shillings’ worth of silver, and in a
locked cupboard I burst in the inner room were eight pounds in gold. I
could go forth into the world again, equipped.

“Then came a curious hesitation. Was my appearance really credible? I
tried myself with a little bedroom looking-glass, inspecting myself
from every point of view to discover any forgotten chink, but it all
seemed sound. I was grotesque to the theatrical pitch, a stage miser,
but I was certainly not a physical impossibility. Gathering confidence,
I took my looking-glass down into the shop, pulled down the shop
blinds, and surveyed myself from every point of view with the help of
the cheval glass in the corner.

“I spent some minutes screwing up my courage and then unlocked the shop
door and marched out into the street, leaving the little man to get out
of his sheet again when he liked. In five minutes a dozen turnings
intervened between me and the costumier’s shop. No one appeared to
notice me very pointedly. My last difficulty seemed overcome.”

He stopped again.

“And you troubled no more about the hunchback?” said Kemp.

“No,” said the Invisible Man. “Nor have I heard what became of him. I
suppose he untied himself or kicked himself out. The knots were pretty
tight.”

He became silent and went to the window and stared out.

“What happened when you went out into the Strand?”

“Oh!—disillusionment again. I thought my troubles were over.
Practically I thought I had impunity to do whatever I chose,
everything—save to give away my secret. So I thought. Whatever I did,
whatever the consequences might be, was nothing to me. I had merely to
fling aside my garments and vanish. No person could hold me. I could
take my money where I found it. I decided to treat myself to a
sumptuous feast, and then put up at a good hotel, and accumulate a new
outfit of property. I felt amazingly confident; it’s not particularly
pleasant recalling that I was an ass. I went into a place and was
already ordering lunch, when it occurred to me that I could not eat
unless I exposed my invisible face. I finished ordering the lunch, told
the man I should be back in ten minutes, and went out exasperated. I
don’t know if you have ever been disappointed in your appetite.”

“Not quite so badly,” said Kemp, “but I can imagine it.”

“I could have smashed the silly devils. At last, faint with the desire
for tasteful food, I went into another place and demanded a private
room. ‘I am disfigured,’ I said. ‘Badly.’ They looked at me curiously,
but of course it was not their affair—and so at last I got my lunch. It
was not particularly well served, but it sufficed; and when I had had
it, I sat over a cigar, trying to plan my line of action. And outside a
snowstorm was beginning.

“The more I thought it over, Kemp, the more I realised what a helpless
absurdity an Invisible Man was—in a cold and dirty climate and a
crowded civilised city. Before I made this mad experiment I had dreamt
of a thousand advantages. That afternoon it seemed all disappointment.
I went over the heads of the things a man reckons desirable. No doubt
invisibility made it possible to get them, but it made it impossible to
enjoy them when they are got. Ambition—what is the good of pride of
place when you cannot appear there? What is the good of the love of
woman when her name must needs be Delilah? I have no taste for
politics, for the blackguardisms of fame, for philanthropy, for sport.
What was I to do? And for this I had become a wrapped-up mystery, a
swathed and bandaged caricature of a man!”

He paused, and his attitude suggested a roving glance at the window.

“But how did you get to Iping?” said Kemp, anxious to keep his guest
busy talking.

“I went there to work. I had one hope. It was a half idea! I have it
still. It is a full blown idea now. A way of getting back! Of restoring
what I have done. When I choose. When I have done all I mean to do
invisibly. And that is what I chiefly want to talk to you about now.”

“You went straight to Iping?”

“Yes. I had simply to get my three volumes of memoranda and my
cheque-book, my luggage and underclothing, order a quantity of
chemicals to work out this idea of mine—I will show you the
calculations as soon as I get my books—and then I started. Jove! I
remember the snowstorm now, and the accursed bother it was to keep the
snow from damping my pasteboard nose.”

“At the end,” said Kemp, “the day before yesterday, when they found you
out, you rather—to judge by the papers—”

“I did. Rather. Did I kill that fool of a constable?”

“No,” said Kemp. “He’s expected to recover.”

“That’s his luck, then. I clean lost my temper, the fools! Why couldn’t
they leave me alone? And that grocer lout?”

“There are no deaths expected,” said Kemp.

“I don’t know about that tramp of mine,” said the Invisible Man, with
an unpleasant laugh.

“By Heaven, Kemp, you don’t know what rage _is_! ... To have worked for
years, to have planned and plotted, and then to get some fumbling
purblind idiot messing across your course! ... Every conceivable sort
of silly creature that has ever been created has been sent to cross me.

“If I have much more of it, I shall go wild—I shall start mowing ’em.

“As it is, they’ve made things a thousand times more difficult.”

“No doubt it’s exasperating,” said Kemp, drily.




CHAPTER XXIV.
THE PLAN THAT FAILED


“But now,” said Kemp, with a side glance out of the window, “what are
we to do?”

He moved nearer his guest as he spoke in such a manner as to prevent
the possibility of a sudden glimpse of the three men who were advancing
up the hill road—with an intolerable slowness, as it seemed to Kemp.

“What were you planning to do when you were heading for Port Burdock?
_Had_ you any plan?”

“I was going to clear out of the country. But I have altered that plan
rather since seeing you. I thought it would be wise, now the weather is
hot and invisibility possible, to make for the South. Especially as my
secret was known, and everyone would be on the lookout for a masked and
muffled man. You have a line of steamers from here to France. My idea
was to get aboard one and run the risks of the passage. Thence I could
go by train into Spain, or else get to Algiers. It would not be
difficult. There a man might always be invisible—and yet live. And do
things. I was using that tramp as a money box and luggage carrier,
until I decided how to get my books and things sent over to meet me.”

“That’s clear.”

“And then the filthy brute must needs try and rob me! He _has_ hidden
my books, Kemp. Hidden my books! If I can lay my hands on him!”

“Best plan to get the books out of him first.”

“But where is he? Do you know?”

“He’s in the town police station, locked up, by his own request, in the
strongest cell in the place.”

“Cur!” said the Invisible Man.

“But that hangs up your plans a little.”

“We must get those books; those books are vital.”

“Certainly,” said Kemp, a little nervously, wondering if he heard
footsteps outside. “Certainly we must get those books. But that won’t
be difficult, if he doesn’t know they’re for you.”

“No,” said the Invisible Man, and thought.

Kemp tried to think of something to keep the talk going, but the
Invisible Man resumed of his own accord.

“Blundering into your house, Kemp,” he said, “changes all my plans. For
you are a man that can understand. In spite of all that has happened,
in spite of this publicity, of the loss of my books, of what I have
suffered, there still remain great possibilities, huge possibilities—”

“You have told no one I am here?” he asked abruptly.

Kemp hesitated. “That was implied,” he said.

“No one?” insisted Griffin.

“Not a soul.”

“Ah! Now—” The Invisible Man stood up, and sticking his arms akimbo
began to pace the study.

“I made a mistake, Kemp, a huge mistake, in carrying this thing through
alone. I have wasted strength, time, opportunities. Alone—it is
wonderful how little a man can do alone! To rob a little, to hurt a
little, and there is the end.

“What I want, Kemp, is a goal-keeper, a helper, and a hiding-place, an
arrangement whereby I can sleep and eat and rest in peace, and
unsuspected. I must have a confederate. With a confederate, with food
and rest—a thousand things are possible.

“Hitherto I have gone on vague lines. We have to consider all that
invisibility means, all that it does not mean. It means little
advantage for eavesdropping and so forth—one makes sounds. It’s of
little help—a little help perhaps—in housebreaking and so forth. Once
you’ve caught me you could easily imprison me. But on the other hand I
am hard to catch. This invisibility, in fact, is only good in two
cases: It’s useful in getting away, it’s useful in approaching. It’s
particularly useful, therefore, in killing. I can walk round a man,
whatever weapon he has, choose my point, strike as I like. Dodge as I
like. Escape as I like.”

Kemp’s hand went to his moustache. Was that a movement downstairs?

“And it is killing we must do, Kemp.”

“It is killing we must do,” repeated Kemp. “I’m listening to your plan,
Griffin, but I’m not agreeing, mind. _Why_ killing?”

“Not wanton killing, but a judicious slaying. The point is, they know
there is an Invisible Man—as well as we know there is an Invisible Man.
And that Invisible Man, Kemp, must now establish a Reign of Terror.
Yes; no doubt it’s startling. But I mean it. A Reign of Terror. He must
take some town like your Burdock and terrify and dominate it. He must
issue his orders. He can do that in a thousand ways—scraps of paper
thrust under doors would suffice. And all who disobey his orders he
must kill, and kill all who would defend them.”

“Humph!” said Kemp, no longer listening to Griffin but to the sound of
his front door opening and closing.

“It seems to me, Griffin,” he said, to cover his wandering attention,
“that your confederate would be in a difficult position.”

“No one would know he was a confederate,” said the Invisible Man,
eagerly. And then suddenly, “Hush! What’s that downstairs?”

“Nothing,” said Kemp, and suddenly began to speak loud and fast. “I
don’t agree to this, Griffin,” he said. “Understand me, I don’t agree
to this. Why dream of playing a game against the race? How can you hope
to gain happiness? Don’t be a lone wolf. Publish your results; take the
world—take the nation at least—into your confidence. Think what you
might do with a million helpers—”

The Invisible Man interrupted—arm extended. “There are footsteps coming
upstairs,” he said in a low voice.

“Nonsense,” said Kemp.

“Let me see,” said the Invisible Man, and advanced, arm extended, to
the door.

And then things happened very swiftly. Kemp hesitated for a second and
then moved to intercept him. The Invisible Man started and stood still.
“Traitor!” cried the Voice, and suddenly the dressing-gown opened, and
sitting down the Unseen began to disrobe. Kemp made three swift steps
to the door, and forthwith the Invisible Man—his legs had
vanished—sprang to his feet with a shout. Kemp flung the door open.

As it opened, there came a sound of hurrying feet downstairs and
voices.

With a quick movement Kemp thrust the Invisible Man back, sprang aside,
and slammed the door. The key was outside and ready. In another moment
Griffin would have been alone in the belvedere study, a prisoner. Save
for one little thing. The key had been slipped in hastily that morning.
As Kemp slammed the door it fell noisily upon the carpet.

Kemp’s face became white. He tried to grip the door handle with both
hands. For a moment he stood lugging. Then the door gave six inches.
But he got it closed again. The second time it was jerked a foot wide,
and the dressing-gown came wedging itself into the opening. His throat
was gripped by invisible fingers, and he left his hold on the handle to
defend himself. He was forced back, tripped and pitched heavily into
the corner of the landing. The empty dressing-gown was flung on the top
of him.

Halfway up the staircase was Colonel Adye, the recipient of Kemp’s
letter, the chief of the Burdock police. He was staring aghast at the
sudden appearance of Kemp, followed by the extraordinary sight of
clothing tossing empty in the air. He saw Kemp felled, and struggling
to his feet. He saw him rush forward, and go down again, felled like an
ox.

Then suddenly he was struck violently. By nothing! A vast weight, it
seemed, leapt upon him, and he was hurled headlong down the staircase,
with a grip on his throat and a knee in his groin. An invisible foot
trod on his back, a ghostly patter passed downstairs, he heard the two
police officers in the hall shout and run, and the front door of the
house slammed violently.

He rolled over and sat up staring. He saw, staggering down the
staircase, Kemp, dusty and disheveled, one side of his face white from
a blow, his lip bleeding, and a pink dressing-gown and some
underclothing held in his arms.

“My God!” cried Kemp, “the game’s up! He’s gone!”




CHAPTER XXV.
THE HUNTING OF THE INVISIBLE MAN


For a space Kemp was too inarticulate to make Adye understand the swift
things that had just happened. They stood on the landing, Kemp speaking
swiftly, the grotesque swathings of Griffin still on his arm. But
presently Adye began to grasp something of the situation.

“He is mad,” said Kemp; “inhuman. He is pure selfishness. He thinks of
nothing but his own advantage, his own safety. I have listened to such
a story this morning of brutal self-seeking.... He has wounded men. He
will kill them unless we can prevent him. He will create a panic.
Nothing can stop him. He is going out now—furious!”

“He must be caught,” said Adye. “That is certain.”

“But how?” cried Kemp, and suddenly became full of ideas. “You must
begin at once. You must set every available man to work; you must
prevent his leaving this district. Once he gets away, he may go through
the countryside as he wills, killing and maiming. He dreams of a reign
of terror! A reign of terror, I tell you. You must set a watch on
trains and roads and shipping. The garrison must help. You must wire
for help. The only thing that may keep him here is the thought of
recovering some books of notes he counts of value. I will tell you of
that! There is a man in your police station—Marvel.”

“I know,” said Adye, “I know. Those books—yes. But the tramp....”

“Says he hasn’t them. But he thinks the tramp has. And you must prevent
him from eating or sleeping; day and night the country must be astir
for him. Food must be locked up and secured, all food, so that he will
have to break his way to it. The houses everywhere must be barred
against him. Heaven send us cold nights and rain! The whole
country-side must begin hunting and keep hunting. I tell you, Adye, he
is a danger, a disaster; unless he is pinned and secured, it is
frightful to think of the things that may happen.”

“What else can we do?” said Adye. “I must go down at once and begin
organising. But why not come? Yes—you come too! Come, and we must hold
a sort of council of war—get Hopps to help—and the railway managers. By
Jove! it’s urgent. Come along—tell me as we go. What else is there we
can do? Put that stuff down.”

In another moment Adye was leading the way downstairs. They found the
front door open and the policemen standing outside staring at empty
air. “He’s got away, sir,” said one.

“We must go to the central station at once,” said Adye. “One of you go
on down and get a cab to come up and meet us—quickly. And now, Kemp,
what else?”

“Dogs,” said Kemp. “Get dogs. They don’t see him, but they wind him.
Get dogs.”

“Good,” said Adye. “It’s not generally known, but the prison officials
over at Halstead know a man with bloodhounds. Dogs. What else?”

“Bear in mind,” said Kemp, “his food shows. After eating, his food
shows until it is assimilated. So that he has to hide after eating. You
must keep on beating. Every thicket, every quiet corner. And put all
weapons—all implements that might be weapons, away. He can’t carry such
things for long. And what he can snatch up and strike men with must be
hidden away.”

“Good again,” said Adye. “We shall have him yet!”

“And on the roads,” said Kemp, and hesitated.

“Yes?” said Adye.

“Powdered glass,” said Kemp. “It’s cruel, I know. But think of what he
may do!”

Adye drew the air in sharply between his teeth. “It’s unsportsmanlike.
I don’t know. But I’ll have powdered glass got ready. If he goes too
far....”

“The man’s become inhuman, I tell you,” said Kemp. “I am as sure he
will establish a reign of terror—so soon as he has got over the
emotions of this escape—as I am sure I am talking to you. Our only
chance is to be ahead. He has cut himself off from his kind. His blood
be upon his own head.”




CHAPTER XXVI.
THE WICKSTEED MURDER


The Invisible Man seems to have rushed out of Kemp’s house in a state
of blind fury. A little child playing near Kemp’s gateway was violently
caught up and thrown aside, so that its ankle was broken, and
thereafter for some hours the Invisible Man passed out of human
perceptions. No one knows where he went nor what he did. But one can
imagine him hurrying through the hot June forenoon, up the hill and on
to the open downland behind Port Burdock, raging and despairing at his
intolerable fate, and sheltering at last, heated and weary, amid the
thickets of Hintondean, to piece together again his shattered schemes
against his species. That seems the most probable refuge for him, for
there it was he re-asserted himself in a grimly tragical manner about
two in the afternoon.

One wonders what his state of mind may have been during that time, and
what plans he devised. No doubt he was almost ecstatically exasperated
by Kemp’s treachery, and though we may be able to understand the
motives that led to that deceit, we may still imagine and even
sympathise a little with the fury the attempted surprise must have
occasioned. Perhaps something of the stunned astonishment of his Oxford
Street experiences may have returned to him, for he had evidently
counted on Kemp’s co-operation in his brutal dream of a terrorised
world. At any rate he vanished from human ken about midday, and no
living witness can tell what he did until about half-past two. It was a
fortunate thing, perhaps, for humanity, but for him it was a fatal
inaction.

During that time a growing multitude of men scattered over the
countryside were busy. In the morning he had still been simply a
legend, a terror; in the afternoon, by virtue chiefly of Kemp’s drily
worded proclamation, he was presented as a tangible antagonist, to be
wounded, captured, or overcome, and the countryside began organising
itself with inconceivable rapidity. By two o’clock even he might still
have removed himself out of the district by getting aboard a train, but
after two that became impossible. Every passenger train along the lines
on a great parallelogram between Southampton, Manchester, Brighton and
Horsham, travelled with locked doors, and the goods traffic was almost
entirely suspended. And in a great circle of twenty miles round Port
Burdock, men armed with guns and bludgeons were presently setting out
in groups of three and four, with dogs, to beat the roads and fields.

Mounted policemen rode along the country lanes, stopping at every
cottage and warning the people to lock up their houses, and keep
indoors unless they were armed, and all the elementary schools had
broken up by three o’clock, and the children, scared and keeping
together in groups, were hurrying home. Kemp’s proclamation—signed
indeed by Adye—was posted over almost the whole district by four or
five o’clock in the afternoon. It gave briefly but clearly all the
conditions of the struggle, the necessity of keeping the Invisible Man
from food and sleep, the necessity for incessant watchfulness and for a
prompt attention to any evidence of his movements. And so swift and
decided was the action of the authorities, so prompt and universal was
the belief in this strange being, that before nightfall an area of
several hundred square miles was in a stringent state of siege. And
before nightfall, too, a thrill of horror went through the whole
watching nervous countryside. Going from whispering mouth to mouth,
swift and certain over the length and breadth of the country, passed
the story of the murder of Mr. Wicksteed.

If our supposition that the Invisible Man’s refuge was the Hintondean
thickets, then we must suppose that in the early afternoon he sallied
out again bent upon some project that involved the use of a weapon. We
cannot know what the project was, but the evidence that he had the iron
rod in hand before he met Wicksteed is to me at least overwhelming.

Of course we can know nothing of the details of that encounter. It
occurred on the edge of a gravel pit, not two hundred yards from Lord
Burdock’s lodge gate. Everything points to a desperate struggle—the
trampled ground, the numerous wounds Mr. Wicksteed received, his
splintered walking-stick; but why the attack was made, save in a
murderous frenzy, it is impossible to imagine. Indeed the theory of
madness is almost unavoidable. Mr. Wicksteed was a man of forty-five or
forty-six, steward to Lord Burdock, of inoffensive habits and
appearance, the very last person in the world to provoke such a
terrible antagonist. Against him it would seem the Invisible Man used
an iron rod dragged from a broken piece of fence. He stopped this quiet
man, going quietly home to his midday meal, attacked him, beat down his
feeble defences, broke his arm, felled him, and smashed his head to a
jelly.

Of course, he must have dragged this rod out of the fencing before he
met his victim—he must have been carrying it ready in his hand. Only
two details beyond what has already been stated seem to bear on the
matter. One is the circumstance that the gravel pit was not in Mr.
Wicksteed’s direct path home, but nearly a couple of hundred yards out
of his way. The other is the assertion of a little girl to the effect
that, going to her afternoon school, she saw the murdered man
“trotting” in a peculiar manner across a field towards the gravel pit.
Her pantomime of his action suggests a man pursuing something on the
ground before him and striking at it ever and again with his
walking-stick. She was the last person to see him alive. He passed out
of her sight to his death, the struggle being hidden from her only by a
clump of beech trees and a slight depression in the ground.

Now this, to the present writer’s mind at least, lifts the murder out
of the realm of the absolutely wanton. We may imagine that Griffin had
taken the rod as a weapon indeed, but without any deliberate intention
of using it in murder. Wicksteed may then have come by and noticed this
rod inexplicably moving through the air. Without any thought of the
Invisible Man—for Port Burdock is ten miles away—he may have pursued
it. It is quite conceivable that he may not even have heard of the
Invisible Man. One can then imagine the Invisible Man making
off—quietly in order to avoid discovering his presence in the
neighbourhood, and Wicksteed, excited and curious, pursuing this
unaccountably locomotive object—finally striking at it.

No doubt the Invisible Man could easily have distanced his middle-aged
pursuer under ordinary circumstances, but the position in which
Wicksteed’s body was found suggests that he had the ill luck to drive
his quarry into a corner between a drift of stinging nettles and the
gravel pit. To those who appreciate the extraordinary irascibility of
the Invisible Man, the rest of the encounter will be easy to imagine.

But this is pure hypothesis. The only undeniable facts—for stories of
children are often unreliable—are the discovery of Wicksteed’s body,
done to death, and of the blood-stained iron rod flung among the
nettles. The abandonment of the rod by Griffin, suggests that in the
emotional excitement of the affair, the purpose for which he took it—if
he had a purpose—was abandoned. He was certainly an intensely
egotistical and unfeeling man, but the sight of his victim, his first
victim, bloody and pitiful at his feet, may have released some long
pent fountain of remorse which for a time may have flooded whatever
scheme of action he had contrived.

After the murder of Mr. Wicksteed, he would seem to have struck across
the country towards the downland. There is a story of a voice heard
about sunset by a couple of men in a field near Fern Bottom. It was
wailing and laughing, sobbing and groaning, and ever and again it
shouted. It must have been queer hearing. It drove up across the middle
of a clover field and died away towards the hills.

That afternoon the Invisible Man must have learnt something of the
rapid use Kemp had made of his confidences. He must have found houses
locked and secured; he may have loitered about railway stations and
prowled about inns, and no doubt he read the proclamations and realised
something of the nature of the campaign against him. And as the evening
advanced, the fields became dotted here and there with groups of three
or four men, and noisy with the yelping of dogs. These men-hunters had
particular instructions in the case of an encounter as to the way they
should support one another. But he avoided them all. We may understand
something of his exasperation, and it could have been none the less
because he himself had supplied the information that was being used so
remorselessly against him. For that day at least he lost heart; for
nearly twenty-four hours, save when he turned on Wicksteed, he was a
hunted man. In the night, he must have eaten and slept; for in the
morning he was himself again, active, powerful, angry, and malignant,
prepared for his last great struggle against the world.




CHAPTER XXVII.
THE SIEGE OF KEMP’S HOUSE


Kemp read a strange missive, written in pencil on a greasy sheet of
paper.

“You have been amazingly energetic and clever,” this letter ran,
“though what you stand to gain by it I cannot imagine. You are against
me. For a whole day you have chased me; you have tried to rob me of a
night’s rest. But I have had food in spite of you, I have slept in
spite of you, and the game is only beginning. The game is only
beginning. There is nothing for it, but to start the Terror. This
announces the first day of the Terror. Port Burdock is no longer under
the Queen, tell your Colonel of Police, and the rest of them; it is
under me—the Terror! This is day one of year one of the new epoch—the
Epoch of the Invisible Man. I am Invisible Man the First. To begin with
the rule will be easy. The first day there will be one execution for
the sake of example—a man named Kemp. Death starts for him to-day. He
may lock himself away, hide himself away, get guards about him, put on
armour if he likes—Death, the unseen Death, is coming. Let him take
precautions; it will impress my people. Death starts from the pillar
box by midday. The letter will fall in as the postman comes along, then
off! The game begins. Death starts. Help him not, my people, lest Death
fall upon you also. To-day Kemp is to die.”

Kemp read this letter twice, “It’s no hoax,” he said. “That’s his
voice! And he means it.”

He turned the folded sheet over and saw on the addressed side of it the
postmark Hintondean, and the prosaic detail “2d. to pay.”

He got up slowly, leaving his lunch unfinished—the letter had come by
the one o’clock post—and went into his study. He rang for his
housekeeper, and told her to go round the house at once, examine all
the fastenings of the windows, and close all the shutters. He closed
the shutters of his study himself. From a locked drawer in his bedroom
he took a little revolver, examined it carefully, and put it into the
pocket of his lounge jacket. He wrote a number of brief notes, one to
Colonel Adye, gave them to his servant to take, with explicit
instructions as to her way of leaving the house. “There is no danger,”
he said, and added a mental reservation, “to you.” He remained
meditative for a space after doing this, and then returned to his
cooling lunch.

He ate with gaps of thought. Finally he struck the table sharply. “We
will have him!” he said; “and I am the bait. He will come too far.”

He went up to the belvedere, carefully shutting every door after him.
“It’s a game,” he said, “an odd game—but the chances are all for me,
Mr. Griffin, in spite of your invisibility. Griffin _contra mundum_ ...
with a vengeance.”

He stood at the window staring at the hot hillside. “He must get food
every day—and I don’t envy him. Did he really sleep last night? Out in
the open somewhere—secure from collisions. I wish we could get some
good cold wet weather instead of the heat.

“He may be watching me now.”

He went close to the window. Something rapped smartly against the
brickwork over the frame, and made him start violently back.

“I’m getting nervous,” said Kemp. But it was five minutes before he
went to the window again. “It must have been a sparrow,” he said.

Presently he heard the front-door bell ringing, and hurried downstairs.
He unbolted and unlocked the door, examined the chain, put it up, and
opened cautiously without showing himself. A familiar voice hailed him.
It was Adye.

“Your servant’s been assaulted, Kemp,” he said round the door.

“What!” exclaimed Kemp.

“Had that note of yours taken away from her. He’s close about here. Let
me in.”

Kemp released the chain, and Adye entered through as narrow an opening
as possible. He stood in the hall, looking with infinite relief at Kemp
refastening the door. “Note was snatched out of her hand. Scared her
horribly. She’s down at the station. Hysterics. He’s close here. What
was it about?”

Kemp swore.

“What a fool I was,” said Kemp. “I might have known. It’s not an hour’s
walk from Hintondean. Already?”

“What’s up?” said Adye.

“Look here!” said Kemp, and led the way into his study. He handed Adye
the Invisible Man’s letter. Adye read it and whistled softly. “And
you—?” said Adye.

“Proposed a trap—like a fool,” said Kemp, “and sent my proposal out by
a maid servant. To him.”

Adye followed Kemp’s profanity.

“He’ll clear out,” said Adye.

“Not he,” said Kemp.

A resounding smash of glass came from upstairs. Adye had a silvery
glimpse of a little revolver half out of Kemp’s pocket. “It’s a window,
upstairs!” said Kemp, and led the way up. There came a second smash
while they were still on the staircase. When they reached the study
they found two of the three windows smashed, half the room littered
with splintered glass, and one big flint lying on the writing table.
The two men stopped in the doorway, contemplating the wreckage. Kemp
swore again, and as he did so the third window went with a snap like a
pistol, hung starred for a moment, and collapsed in jagged, shivering
triangles into the room.

“What’s this for?” said Adye.

“It’s a beginning,” said Kemp.

“There’s no way of climbing up here?”

“Not for a cat,” said Kemp.

“No shutters?”

“Not here. All the downstairs rooms—Hullo!”

Smash, and then whack of boards hit hard came from downstairs.
“Confound him!” said Kemp. “That must be—yes—it’s one of the bedrooms.
He’s going to do all the house. But he’s a fool. The shutters are up,
and the glass will fall outside. He’ll cut his feet.”

Another window proclaimed its destruction. The two men stood on the
landing perplexed. “I have it!” said Adye. “Let me have a stick or
something, and I’ll go down to the station and get the bloodhounds put
on. That ought to settle him! They’re hard by—not ten minutes—”

Another window went the way of its fellows.

“You haven’t a revolver?” asked Adye.

Kemp’s hand went to his pocket. Then he hesitated. “I haven’t one—at
least to spare.”

“I’ll bring it back,” said Adye, “you’ll be safe here.”

Kemp, ashamed of his momentary lapse from truthfulness, handed him the
weapon.

“Now for the door,” said Adye.

As they stood hesitating in the hall, they heard one of the first-floor
bedroom windows crack and clash. Kemp went to the door and began to
slip the bolts as silently as possible. His face was a little paler
than usual. “You must step straight out,” said Kemp. In another moment
Adye was on the doorstep and the bolts were dropping back into the
staples. He hesitated for a moment, feeling more comfortable with his
back against the door. Then he marched, upright and square, down the
steps. He crossed the lawn and approached the gate. A little breeze
seemed to ripple over the grass. Something moved near him. “Stop a
bit,” said a Voice, and Adye stopped dead and his hand tightened on the
revolver.

“Well?” said Adye, white and grim, and every nerve tense.

“Oblige me by going back to the house,” said the Voice, as tense and
grim as Adye’s.

“Sorry,” said Adye a little hoarsely, and moistened his lips with his
tongue. The Voice was on his left front, he thought. Suppose he were to
take his luck with a shot?

“What are you going for?” said the Voice, and there was a quick
movement of the two, and a flash of sunlight from the open lip of
Adye’s pocket.

Adye desisted and thought. “Where I go,” he said slowly, “is my own
business.” The words were still on his lips, when an arm came round his
neck, his back felt a knee, and he was sprawling backward. He drew
clumsily and fired absurdly, and in another moment he was struck in the
mouth and the revolver wrested from his grip. He made a vain clutch at
a slippery limb, tried to struggle up and fell back. “Damn!” said Adye.
The Voice laughed. “I’d kill you now if it wasn’t the waste of a
bullet,” it said. He saw the revolver in mid-air, six feet off,
covering him.

“Well?” said Adye, sitting up.

“Get up,” said the Voice.

Adye stood up.

“Attention,” said the Voice, and then fiercely, “Don’t try any games.
Remember I can see your face if you can’t see mine. You’ve got to go
back to the house.”

“He won’t let me in,” said Adye.

“That’s a pity,” said the Invisible Man. “I’ve got no quarrel with
you.”

Adye moistened his lips again. He glanced away from the barrel of the
revolver and saw the sea far off very blue and dark under the midday
sun, the smooth green down, the white cliff of the Head, and the
multitudinous town, and suddenly he knew that life was very sweet. His
eyes came back to this little metal thing hanging between heaven and
earth, six yards away. “What am I to do?” he said sullenly.

“What am _I_ to do?” asked the Invisible Man. “You will get help. The
only thing is for you to go back.”

“I will try. If he lets me in will you promise not to rush the door?”

“I’ve got no quarrel with you,” said the Voice.

Kemp had hurried upstairs after letting Adye out, and now crouching
among the broken glass and peering cautiously over the edge of the
study window sill, he saw Adye stand parleying with the Unseen. “Why
doesn’t he fire?” whispered Kemp to himself. Then the revolver moved a
little and the glint of the sunlight flashed in Kemp’s eyes. He shaded
his eyes and tried to see the source of the blinding beam.

“Surely!” he said, “Adye has given up the revolver.”

“Promise not to rush the door,” Adye was saying. “Don’t push a winning
game too far. Give a man a chance.”

“You go back to the house. I tell you flatly I will not promise
anything.”

Adye’s decision seemed suddenly made. He turned towards the house,
walking slowly with his hands behind him. Kemp watched him—puzzled. The
revolver vanished, flashed again into sight, vanished again, and became
evident on a closer scrutiny as a little dark object following Adye.
Then things happened very quickly. Adye leapt backwards, swung around,
clutched at this little object, missed it, threw up his hands and fell
forward on his face, leaving a little puff of blue in the air. Kemp did
not hear the sound of the shot. Adye writhed, raised himself on one
arm, fell forward, and lay still.

For a space Kemp remained staring at the quiet carelessness of Adye’s
attitude. The afternoon was very hot and still, nothing seemed stirring
in all the world save a couple of yellow butterflies chasing each other
through the shrubbery between the house and the road gate. Adye lay on
the lawn near the gate. The blinds of all the villas down the hill-road
were drawn, but in one little green summer-house was a white figure,
apparently an old man asleep. Kemp scrutinised the surroundings of the
house for a glimpse of the revolver, but it had vanished. His eyes came
back to Adye. The game was opening well.

Then came a ringing and knocking at the front door, that grew at last
tumultuous, but pursuant to Kemp’s instructions the servants had locked
themselves into their rooms. This was followed by a silence. Kemp sat
listening and then began peering cautiously out of the three windows,
one after another. He went to the staircase head and stood listening
uneasily. He armed himself with his bedroom poker, and went to examine
the interior fastenings of the ground-floor windows again. Everything
was safe and quiet. He returned to the belvedere. Adye lay motionless
over the edge of the gravel just as he had fallen. Coming along the
road by the villas were the housemaid and two policemen.

Everything was deadly still. The three people seemed very slow in
approaching. He wondered what his antagonist was doing.

He started. There was a smash from below. He hesitated and went
downstairs again. Suddenly the house resounded with heavy blows and the
splintering of wood. He heard a smash and the destructive clang of the
iron fastenings of the shutters. He turned the key and opened the
kitchen door. As he did so, the shutters, split and splintering, came
flying inward. He stood aghast. The window frame, save for one
crossbar, was still intact, but only little teeth of glass remained in
the frame. The shutters had been driven in with an axe, and now the axe
was descending in sweeping blows upon the window frame and the iron
bars defending it. Then suddenly it leapt aside and vanished. He saw
the revolver lying on the path outside, and then the little weapon
sprang into the air. He dodged back. The revolver cracked just too
late, and a splinter from the edge of the closing door flashed over his
head. He slammed and locked the door, and as he stood outside he heard
Griffin shouting and laughing. Then the blows of the axe with its
splitting and smashing consequences, were resumed.

Kemp stood in the passage trying to think. In a moment the Invisible
Man would be in the kitchen. This door would not keep him a moment, and
then—

A ringing came at the front door again. It would be the policemen. He
ran into the hall, put up the chain, and drew the bolts. He made the
girl speak before he dropped the chain, and the three people blundered
into the house in a heap, and Kemp slammed the door again.

“The Invisible Man!” said Kemp. “He has a revolver, with two
shots—left. He’s killed Adye. Shot him anyhow. Didn’t you see him on
the lawn? He’s lying there.”

“Who?” said one of the policemen.

“Adye,” said Kemp.

“We came in the back way,” said the girl.

“What’s that smashing?” asked one of the policemen.

“He’s in the kitchen—or will be. He has found an axe—”

Suddenly the house was full of the Invisible Man’s resounding blows on
the kitchen door. The girl stared towards the kitchen, shuddered, and
retreated into the dining-room. Kemp tried to explain in broken
sentences. They heard the kitchen door give.

“This way,” said Kemp, starting into activity, and bundled the
policemen into the dining-room doorway.

“Poker,” said Kemp, and rushed to the fender. He handed the poker he
had carried to the policeman and the dining-room one to the other. He
suddenly flung himself backward.

“Whup!” said one policeman, ducked, and caught the axe on his poker.
The pistol snapped its penultimate shot and ripped a valuable Sidney
Cooper. The second policeman brought his poker down on the little
weapon, as one might knock down a wasp, and sent it rattling to the
floor.

At the first clash the girl screamed, stood screaming for a moment by
the fireplace, and then ran to open the shutters—possibly with an idea
of escaping by the shattered window.

The axe receded into the passage, and fell to a position about two feet
from the ground. They could hear the Invisible Man breathing. “Stand
away, you two,” he said. “I want that man Kemp.”

“We want you,” said the first policeman, making a quick step forward
and wiping with his poker at the Voice. The Invisible Man must have
started back, and he blundered into the umbrella stand.

Then, as the policeman staggered with the swing of the blow he had
aimed, the Invisible Man countered with the axe, the helmet crumpled
like paper, and the blow sent the man spinning to the floor at the head
of the kitchen stairs. But the second policeman, aiming behind the axe
with his poker, hit something soft that snapped. There was a sharp
exclamation of pain and then the axe fell to the ground. The policeman
wiped again at vacancy and hit nothing; he put his foot on the axe, and
struck again. Then he stood, poker clubbed, listening intent for the
slightest movement.

He heard the dining-room window open, and a quick rush of feet within.
His companion rolled over and sat up, with the blood running down
between his eye and ear. “Where is he?” asked the man on the floor.

“Don’t know. I’ve hit him. He’s standing somewhere in the hall. Unless
he’s slipped past you. Doctor Kemp—sir.”

Pause.

“Doctor Kemp,” cried the policeman again.

The second policeman began struggling to his feet. He stood up.
Suddenly the faint pad of bare feet on the kitchen stairs could be
heard. “Yap!” cried the first policeman, and incontinently flung his
poker. It smashed a little gas bracket.

He made as if he would pursue the Invisible Man downstairs. Then he
thought better of it and stepped into the dining-room.

“Doctor Kemp—” he began, and stopped short.

“Doctor Kemp’s a hero,” he said, as his companion looked over his
shoulder.

The dining-room window was wide open, and neither housemaid nor Kemp
was to be seen.

The second policeman’s opinion of Kemp was terse and vivid.




CHAPTER XXVIII.
THE HUNTER HUNTED


Mr. Heelas, Mr. Kemp’s nearest neighbour among the villa holders, was
asleep in his summer house when the siege of Kemp’s house began. Mr.
Heelas was one of the sturdy minority who refused to believe “in all
this nonsense” about an Invisible Man. His wife, however, as he was
subsequently to be reminded, did. He insisted upon walking about his
garden just as if nothing was the matter, and he went to sleep in the
afternoon in accordance with the custom of years. He slept through the
smashing of the windows, and then woke up suddenly with a curious
persuasion of something wrong. He looked across at Kemp’s house, rubbed
his eyes and looked again. Then he put his feet to the ground, and sat
listening. He said he was damned, but still the strange thing was
visible. The house looked as though it had been deserted for
weeks—after a violent riot. Every window was broken, and every window,
save those of the belvedere study, was blinded by the internal
shutters.

“I could have sworn it was all right”—he looked at his watch—“twenty
minutes ago.”

He became aware of a measured concussion and the clash of glass, far
away in the distance. And then, as he sat open-mouthed, came a still
more wonderful thing. The shutters of the drawing-room window were
flung open violently, and the housemaid in her outdoor hat and
garments, appeared struggling in a frantic manner to throw up the sash.
Suddenly a man appeared beside her, helping her—Dr. Kemp! In another
moment the window was open, and the housemaid was struggling out; she
pitched forward and vanished among the shrubs. Mr. Heelas stood up,
exclaiming vaguely and vehemently at all these wonderful things. He saw
Kemp stand on the sill, spring from the window, and reappear almost
instantaneously running along a path in the shrubbery and stooping as
he ran, like a man who evades observation. He vanished behind a
laburnum, and appeared again clambering over a fence that abutted on
the open down. In a second he had tumbled over and was running at a
tremendous pace down the slope towards Mr. Heelas.

“Lord!” cried Mr. Heelas, struck with an idea; “it’s that Invisible Man
brute! It’s right, after all!”

With Mr. Heelas to think things like that was to act, and his cook
watching him from the top window was amazed to see him come pelting
towards the house at a good nine miles an hour. There was a slamming of
doors, a ringing of bells, and the voice of Mr. Heelas bellowing like a
bull. “Shut the doors, shut the windows, shut everything!—the Invisible
Man is coming!” Instantly the house was full of screams and directions,
and scurrying feet. He ran himself to shut the French windows that
opened on the veranda; as he did so Kemp’s head and shoulders and knee
appeared over the edge of the garden fence. In another moment Kemp had
ploughed through the asparagus, and was running across the tennis lawn
to the house.

“You can’t come in,” said Mr. Heelas, shutting the bolts. “I’m very
sorry if he’s after you, but you can’t come in!”

Kemp appeared with a face of terror close to the glass, rapping and
then shaking frantically at the French window. Then, seeing his efforts
were useless, he ran along the veranda, vaulted the end, and went to
hammer at the side door. Then he ran round by the side gate to the
front of the house, and so into the hill-road. And Mr. Heelas staring
from his window—a face of horror—had scarcely witnessed Kemp vanish,
ere the asparagus was being trampled this way and that by feet unseen.
At that Mr. Heelas fled precipitately upstairs, and the rest of the
chase is beyond his purview. But as he passed the staircase window, he
heard the side gate slam.

Emerging into the hill-road, Kemp naturally took the downward
direction, and so it was he came to run in his own person the very race
he had watched with such a critical eye from the belvedere study only
four days ago. He ran it well, for a man out of training, and though
his face was white and wet, his wits were cool to the last. He ran with
wide strides, and wherever a patch of rough ground intervened, wherever
there came a patch of raw flints, or a bit of broken glass shone
dazzling, he crossed it and left the bare invisible feet that followed
to take what line they would.

For the first time in his life Kemp discovered that the hill-road was
indescribably vast and desolate, and that the beginnings of the town
far below at the hill foot were strangely remote. Never had there been
a slower or more painful method of progression than running. All the
gaunt villas, sleeping in the afternoon sun, looked locked and barred;
no doubt they were locked and barred—by his own orders. But at any rate
they might have kept a lookout for an eventuality like this! The town
was rising up now, the sea had dropped out of sight behind it, and
people down below were stirring. A tram was just arriving at the hill
foot. Beyond that was the police station. Was that footsteps he heard
behind him? Spurt.

The people below were staring at him, one or two were running, and his
breath was beginning to saw in his throat. The tram was quite near now,
and the “Jolly Cricketers” was noisily barring its doors. Beyond the
tram were posts and heaps of gravel—the drainage works. He had a
transitory idea of jumping into the tram and slamming the doors, and
then he resolved to go for the police station. In another moment he had
passed the door of the “Jolly Cricketers,” and was in the blistering
fag end of the street, with human beings about him. The tram driver and
his helper—arrested by the sight of his furious haste—stood staring
with the tram horses unhitched. Further on the astonished features of
navvies appeared above the mounds of gravel.

His pace broke a little, and then he heard the swift pad of his
pursuer, and leapt forward again. “The Invisible Man!” he cried to the
navvies, with a vague indicative gesture, and by an inspiration leapt
the excavation and placed a burly group between him and the chase. Then
abandoning the idea of the police station he turned into a little side
street, rushed by a greengrocer’s cart, hesitated for the tenth of a
second at the door of a sweetstuff shop, and then made for the mouth of
an alley that ran back into the main Hill Street again. Two or three
little children were playing here, and shrieked and scattered at his
apparition, and forthwith doors and windows opened and excited mothers
revealed their hearts. Out he shot into Hill Street again, three
hundred yards from the tram-line end, and immediately he became aware
of a tumultuous vociferation and running people.

He glanced up the street towards the hill. Hardly a dozen yards off ran
a huge navvy, cursing in fragments and slashing viciously with a spade,
and hard behind him came the tram conductor with his fists clenched. Up
the street others followed these two, striking and shouting. Down
towards the town, men and women were running, and he noticed clearly
one man coming out of a shop-door with a stick in his hand. “Spread
out! Spread out!” cried some one. Kemp suddenly grasped the altered
condition of the chase. He stopped, and looked round, panting. “He’s
close here!” he cried. “Form a line across—”

He was hit hard under the ear, and went reeling, trying to face round
towards his unseen antagonist. He just managed to keep his feet, and he
struck a vain counter in the air. Then he was hit again under the jaw,
and sprawled headlong on the ground. In another moment a knee
compressed his diaphragm, and a couple of eager hands gripped his
throat, but the grip of one was weaker than the other; he grasped the
wrists, heard a cry of pain from his assailant, and then the spade of
the navvy came whirling through the air above him, and struck something
with a dull thud. He felt a drop of moisture on his face. The grip at
his throat suddenly relaxed, and with a convulsive effort, Kemp loosed
himself, grasped a limp shoulder, and rolled uppermost. He gripped the
unseen elbows near the ground. “I’ve got him!” screamed Kemp. “Help!
Help—hold! He’s down! Hold his feet!”

In another second there was a simultaneous rush upon the struggle, and
a stranger coming into the road suddenly might have thought an
exceptionally savage game of Rugby football was in progress. And there
was no shouting after Kemp’s cry—only a sound of blows and feet and
heavy breathing.

Then came a mighty effort, and the Invisible Man threw off a couple of
his antagonists and rose to his knees. Kemp clung to him in front like
a hound to a stag, and a dozen hands gripped, clutched, and tore at the
Unseen. The tram conductor suddenly got the neck and shoulders and
lugged him back.

Down went the heap of struggling men again and rolled over. There was,
I am afraid, some savage kicking. Then suddenly a wild scream of
“Mercy! Mercy!” that died down swiftly to a sound like choking.

“Get back, you fools!” cried the muffled voice of Kemp, and there was a
vigorous shoving back of stalwart forms. “He’s hurt, I tell you. Stand
back!”

There was a brief struggle to clear a space, and then the circle of
eager faces saw the doctor kneeling, as it seemed, fifteen inches in
the air, and holding invisible arms to the ground. Behind him a
constable gripped invisible ankles.

“Don’t you leave go of en,” cried the big navvy, holding a
blood-stained spade; “he’s shamming.”

“He’s not shamming,” said the doctor, cautiously raising his knee; “and
I’ll hold him.” His face was bruised and already going red; he spoke
thickly because of a bleeding lip. He released one hand and seemed to
be feeling at the face. “The mouth’s all wet,” he said. And then, “Good
God!”

He stood up abruptly and then knelt down on the ground by the side of
the thing unseen. There was a pushing and shuffling, a sound of heavy
feet as fresh people turned up to increase the pressure of the crowd.
People now were coming out of the houses. The doors of the “Jolly
Cricketers” stood suddenly wide open. Very little was said.

Kemp felt about, his hand seeming to pass through empty air. “He’s not
breathing,” he said, and then, “I can’t feel his heart. His side—ugh!”

Suddenly an old woman, peering under the arm of the big navvy, screamed
sharply. “Looky there!” she said, and thrust out a wrinkled finger.

And looking where she pointed, everyone saw, faint and transparent as
though it was made of glass, so that veins and arteries and bones and
nerves could be distinguished, the outline of a hand, a hand limp and
prone. It grew clouded and opaque even as they stared.

“Hullo!” cried the constable. “Here’s his feet a-showing!”

And so, slowly, beginning at his hands and feet and creeping along his
limbs to the vital centres of his body, that strange change continued.
It was like the slow spreading of a poison. First came the little white
nerves, a hazy grey sketch of a limb, then the glassy bones and
intricate arteries, then the flesh and skin, first a faint fogginess,
and then growing rapidly dense and opaque. Presently they could see his
crushed chest and his shoulders, and the dim outline of his drawn and
battered features.

When at last the crowd made way for Kemp to stand erect, there lay,
naked and pitiful on the ground, the bruised and broken body of a young
man about thirty. His hair and brow were white—not grey with age, but
white with the whiteness of albinism—and his eyes were like garnets.
His hands were clenched, his eyes wide open, and his expression was one
of anger and dismay.

“Cover his face!” said a man. “For Gawd’s sake, cover that face!” and
three little children, pushing forward through the crowd, were suddenly
twisted round and sent packing off again.

Someone brought a sheet from the “Jolly Cricketers,” and having covered
him, they carried him into that house. And there it was, on a shabby
bed in a tawdry, ill-lighted bedroom, surrounded by a crowd of ignorant
and excited people, broken and wounded, betrayed and unpitied, that
Griffin, the first of all men to make himself invisible, Griffin, the
most gifted physicist the world has ever seen, ended in infinite
disaster his strange and terrible career.



THE EPILOGUE


So ends the story of the strange and evil experiments of the Invisible
Man. And if you would learn more of him you must go to a little inn
near Port Stowe and talk to the landlord. The sign of the inn is an
empty board save for a hat and boots, and the name is the title of this
story. The landlord is a short and corpulent little man with a nose of
cylindrical proportions, wiry hair, and a sporadic rosiness of visage.
Drink generously, and he will tell you generously of all the things
that happened to him after that time, and of how the lawyers tried to
do him out of the treasure found upon him.

“When they found they couldn’t prove whose money was which, I’m
blessed,” he says, “if they didn’t try to make me out a blooming
treasure trove! Do I _look_ like a Treasure Trove? And then a gentleman
gave me a guinea a night to tell the story at the Empire Music
’All—just to tell ’em in my own words—barring one.”

And if you want to cut off the flow of his reminiscences abruptly, you
can always do so by asking if there weren’t three manuscript books in
the story. He admits there were and proceeds to explain, with
asseverations that everybody thinks _he_ has ’em! But bless you! he
hasn’t. “The Invisible Man it was took ’em off to hide ’em when I cut
and ran for Port Stowe. It’s that Mr. Kemp put people on with the idea
of _my_ having ’em.”

And then he subsides into a pensive state, watches you furtively,
bustles nervously with glasses, and presently leaves the bar.

He is a bachelor man—his tastes were ever bachelor, and there are no
women folk in the house. Outwardly he buttons—it is expected of him—but
in his more vital privacies, in the matter of braces for example, he
still turns to string. He conducts his house without enterprise, but
with eminent decorum. His movements are slow, and he is a great
thinker. But he has a reputation for wisdom and for a respectable
parsimony in the village, and his knowledge of the roads of the South
of England would beat Cobbett.

And on Sunday mornings, every Sunday morning, all the year round, while
he is closed to the outer world, and every night after ten, he goes
into his bar parlour, bearing a glass of gin faintly tinged with water,
and having placed this down, he locks the door and examines the blinds,
and even looks under the table. And then, being satisfied of his
solitude, he unlocks the cupboard and a box in the cupboard and a
drawer in that box, and produces three volumes bound in brown leather,
and places them solemnly in the middle of the table. The covers are
weather-worn and tinged with an algal green—for once they sojourned in
a ditch and some of the pages have been washed blank by dirty water.
The landlord sits down in an armchair, fills a long clay pipe
slowly—gloating over the books the while. Then he pulls one towards him
and opens it, and begins to study it—turning over the leaves backwards
and forwards.

His brows are knit and his lips move painfully. “Hex, little two up in
the air, cross and a fiddle-de-dee. Lord! what a one he was for
intellect!”

Presently he relaxes and leans back, and blinks through his smoke
across the room at things invisible to other eyes. “Full of secrets,”
he says. “Wonderful secrets!”

“Once I get the haul of them—_Lord_!”

“I wouldn’t do what _he_ did; I’d just—well!” He pulls at his pipe.

So he lapses into a dream, the undying wonderful dream of his life. And
though Kemp has fished unceasingly, no human being save the landlord
knows those books are there, with the subtle secret of invisibility and
a dozen other strange secrets written therein. And none other will know
of them until he dies.

                           WANTED--?

                       By EUGENE CUNNINGHAM

   Author of “Beginners’ Luck,” “The Hermit of Tigerhead Butte,” etc.

	A bullet six inches from his head warned Ware’s Kid that
	he was “warmer” in his search for the killer of Eph Carson,
	but even then he did not suspect how soon he was to reach
	the surprising end of the long trail.


Ware’s Kid jogged into Dallas, coming from Austin pursuant to special
orders of the adjutant general, which covered the proposed capture or
burial of one Dell Spreen, who was charged with murder and robbery down
El Paso way.

Horsemen passed him; farmers in wagons with their families about them.
All gave the smallish figure on the black stallion a more than usually
curious glance. He was dressed like a Mexican dandy--a huge black
sombrero, heavy with silver bullion, shading a lean brown face and
sun-narrowed gray-green eyes; a waist-length jumper of soft tanned
goatskin, fringed from shoulder to elbow and with a bouquet of scarlet
roses embroidered upon the back; _pantalones_ of blue, with rows of
twinkling silver buttons on each side of the crimson insert in the outer
seam. Some of those who passed him would have instantly recognized his
name. For he had wiped out Black Alec Rawles’s gang two years before and
so had marked his entry into the Rangers. The tale was a classic over a
wide land.

But the crowd passed on unwittingly. For his white-handled Colt hung
awkwardly high upon his belt and the canny readiness of sleek, brown
Winchester stock to his hand was not readily apparent. Too, he was
obviously no more than eighteen or nineteen years old.

On the main street Ware’s Kid pulled up, this time to stare broodingly
up the shallow canyon of brick and wooden buildings, almost as if he
expected to see Dell Spreen--a small, deadly figure of smooth, fierce
brown face and murderous black eyes--step from a doorway.

A drowsy idler upon a saloon porch, leaning comfortably against a post
with feet in the dust of the street, promised information. Ware’s Kid
spurred over and at sound of the stallion’s feet the lank one opened his
eyes lazily.

“Sher’ff’s office?” inquired Ware’s Kid politely.

“Git to hell out o’ here an’ find out, if you-all’s so cur’us!” snarled
the loafer.

“Sher’ff’s office?” repeated Ware’s Kid.

Finding icy greenish eyes boring into his face, eyes lit by an uncanny
electric sparkling, the loafer sat suddenly stiff-backed.

“’Scuse _me_!” he cried shakily. “But I--I shore thought you-all was a
greaser! Yo’ clothes an’ yo’--yo’----”

Ware’s Kid ignored the profuse flow of apologies. Having received his
directions, he rode on. The lounger mopped damp brow with a sleeve and
peered after the tall black and its small rider.

“Gawd! He’s a mean n’, I bet you!” he said. “Gent what packs a
six-shooter, but reaches fer his carbeen when he’s riled--I bet you he’s
a wolf!”

Ware’s Kid swung down before the sheriff’s office and hitched the
stallion to a splintered post. With carbine cuddled in his arm, he
crossed to stand in the doorway of the office. His roving eyes made out,
in the duskiest corner, a small figure squatting against the wall.

Ware’s Kid went inside. The squatting one was a boy of fifteen,
barefooted, in faded overalls, gingham shirt, and ragged hat upon towy
hair. His round eyes were of the palest blue and he had neither brows
nor lashes, so that his gaze seemed unwinking, like a snake’s.

“Sher’ff?” grunted Ware’s Kid.

The boy jerked his head toward the street door and shrugged silently.
Ware’s Kid, after a long stare, lounged over to another corner and
himself squatted upon his heels.

Presently he forgot the boy in the opposite corner. Slowly he produced
Durham and brown papers and methodically built a cigarette. This he laid
upon the floor before him and rolled another, then a third, fourth,
fifth, sixth. They laid in a neat row. He picked up one from the end of
the row and lit it.

He wondered if he were really to find Dell Spreen here in Dallas. He had
not been in Carwell with Sergeant Ames, on the day three months past,
when Simeon Rutter and two O-Bar riders had spurred into the tiny,
sleepy village, with the word of the murder and robbery of Eph Carson,
Rutter’s partner.

But the sour-faced ranger sergeant had told him of the crime and of his
investigations at El Castillo, the long, low rock wall from behind which
Eph Carson had been shot.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Piecing together the testimony of Rutter and the punchers and adding the
result of his own observation, Ames had made a fairly complete story.
Carson had been on his way back to the O-Bar with about seven thousand
dollars of his and Rutter’s money. During his absence, up Crow Point
way, this gunman Spreen had ridden up to the O-Bar and asked for Carson.
Told that he was absent, Spreen had said grimly that he would wait.

But shortly after breakfast on the day of the murder, while the ranch
house was deserted except for two Mex’ cooks, Spreen had disappeared.
None had since seen him. Spreen knew that Carson was to return with a
large sum of money. The whole ranch had known it.

Evidently, said Ames, Spreen had ridden up the Crow Point trail to
ambush him where it ran along the rock wall in the desert--El Castillo.
He had not waited long--there were but two cigarette stubs in the
trampled sand. Eph Carson had come squarely into range of the steadied
rifle. Then--two shots and the wizened little cowman had side-slipped
from the saddle to sprawl face downward, dead. Having robbed the body,
Spreen had vanished as if the ground had swallowed him.

Ware’s Kid went over the details of his own investigation. He had
located the niche in the wall which had held the murderer’s .44 rifle.
He had re-created the murder; had interviewed Rutter and the O-Bar boys.

The dark, bitter-tongued rancher had told how he had ridden with the
punchers up the trail toward Crow Point, when Carson’s failure to return
had alarmed him. Told how they had found Carson sprawled upon the sand,
found his horse a quarter-mile away with bridle reins caught in the
_ocotillos_.

Two weeks after the murder a peremptory summons had come to Ware’s Kid
from headquarters in Austin. He had found the adjutant general
determined to stamp out the wave of crime then sweeping the border
country. He wanted this Spreen killed or taken. Preferably the latter,
that he might be hanged upon the scene of his crime.

“You wiped out Black Alec’s gang,” the adjutant general had said to
Ware’s Kid. “So I’m giving you this commission: get Dell Spreen! I don’t
care where you have to go to get him, either!”

Ware’s Kid, who was now smoking the fifth cigarette from his layout, was
aroused from his thoughts by footsteps. A stocky man clumped inside the
office and sat down at the battered desk.

“Mawnin’,” nodded the stocky man. The rigidity of his angular face was
broken up by curiosity, as with, alert brown eyes roved over the Mexican
finery. “Somethin’?”

“Do’ know,” shrugged Ware’s Kid.

He noted that the man wore a deputy sheriff’s badge upon his open vest.
He was, perhaps, twenty-nine or thirty, though dark mustache and tiny
goatee made him seem older. He was dusty as from long riding. Now he
reached down stiffly and took off his spurs.

“Do’ know,” repeated Ware’s Kid. “Sher’ff?”

“Sher’ff’s up to Austin, a-powwowin’ with the gov’nor. Art
Willeke--Art’s chief dep’ty--he’s ramblin’ ’round the ellum-bottoms,
Denton way, huntin’ Sam Bass.”

Mention of the notorious outlaw, who was just then keeping Rangers and
peace officers frantic, solved a part of Ware’s Kid’s puzzle. He had
been wondering whether or not to take the local officers into his
confidence; tell them frankly whom he sought.

He decided to forego any help these easterners could give in locating
Spreen--an East Texas man and, perhaps, one known to them--to gain the
greater advantage of working without danger of warning being passed to
Spreen by some friend.

“Kind o’ interested in Bass,” he told the deputy, thoughtfully. “Ranger.
Headquarters Troop. Name’s Ware.”

“Ware?” cried the deputy, staring hard and somewhat unbelievingly.
“Heerd about you-all! Glad to meet you!”

He shook hands and sat down again, still eyeing Ware’s Kid doubtfully.
Then the boy in the corner came silently to the desk. The deputy nodded
to him, hesitated and turned to Ware’s Kid.

“Mind if I talk to him, private?” he asked apologetically.

Ware’s Kid went outside to lean against the wall. He could hear the
boy’s excited whispering; an occasional explosive grunt from the deputy.
Then he was called inside. The boy was gone.

The deputy sat scowling down at the desk, tap-tapping the curving black
butt of the long-barreled Colt at his hip. He glanced up at Ware’s Kid
with the odd, appraising stare he had given the small figure at first
mention of his name.

“My name’s Bos’ Johnson,” he remarked abruptly. “You-all make yo’se’f to
home, here. I’ll be back, right soon.”

He was gone fifteen or twenty minutes and when he came in again, his
face wore that expression of grim rigidity which Ware’s Kid had marked
upon him when first he had come into the office.

“A’right,” he grunted. “Le’s git yo’ hawse to the stable. Then I’ll buy
you-all a drink.”

They saw to the stallion’s stabling, then crossed the street to a low,
brick saloon. There were not many in it--a cowboy or two, a knot of
farmers standing together far down the bar. But, drinking alone, was a
huge man with sullen, red face and close-set black eyes. He turned at
the pair’s entrance, staring.

“Whisky,” said Bos’ Johnson, tonelessly. Ware’s Kid nodded agreement.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The big man watched, tugging at long mustaches and snorting loudly as if
at his private thoughts. He watched belligerently while the bartender
poured the drinks for Ware’s Kid and Bos’ Johnson.

“Bartender!” he bellowed suddenly and crashed a huge fist upon the
polished bar.

“Yes, sir!” replied the bartender. His pasty face was gray-hued. “Yes,
sir!”

“You-all know who I am, bartender? I ask you-all--don’ you-all know what
I am, huh?”

“Yes, sir, Mr. Branch. Course I do. Everybody knows Bull Branch! So’
do!”

Bull Branch continued to glare menacingly at him.

“Bartender!” he growled. “Since when is Mexicans ’lowed to come
a-shovin’ in yere a-drinkin’ with white men? You-all git down there an’
take that-’ere drink away from that Mex’! Then you-all chase him out’n
here ’fore I git mad.”

Slowly the bartender inched toward Ware’s Kid--who had not yet seemed
even to glance in Bull Branch’s direction. When he was still six feet
away, the Ranger turned his head a trifle--and regarded the bartender.
The unhappy man stopped instantly, shrinking back before the uncanny
electric sparkling in the gray-green eyes. Slowly, then, Ware’s Kid
wheeled to face Bull Branch.

“Where _I_ come from--” thus the Ranger in a soft drawl--“ever’ gent
kills his own snakes.”

“What?” roared Bull Branch, lowering big head on bull neck and glaring
ferociously. “_Whut?_”

“Pop yo’ whip, fella!” Ware’s Kid invited him, still in the bored drawl.

Bull Branch gaped amazedly. Deliberately, he pushed back his coat flaps
and put huge hands upon his hips. The pearl-gripped butts of two Colts
showed, almost under his fingers. Then he bore slowly down upon the
Ranger, who stood sideway to the bar with left elbow resting on its
edge. Bos’ Johnson moved unobtrusively away from the bar and out of
possible line of fire. But Bull Branch made no move to draw his guns:
merely came on ponderously.

What followed was blurred like the action of a rattler’s head as it
strikes. The left hand of Ware’s Kid moved--so rapidly that none there
actually saw it move. It caught up the whisky glass from the bar and
flipped the stinging liquor squarely into Bull Branch’s face.

As the huge figure reeled, hands going to tortured eyes, Ware’s Kid shot
forward. He twitched Branch’s Colts from their holsters and hurled them
into a corner. He rained blows upon Bull Branch’s face --leaping clear
off the floor to reach that height.

It was cat-and-mastiff. Blindly, Bull Branch tried to push him off, but
those hard fists, landing with force terrifically out of proportion to
the small body behind them, cut his face to ribbons, closed his eyes to
puffy-lidded slits, drove sickeningly into his mid-section. He staggered
about the barroom, grunting, whining, helpless. At last some instinct
seemed to show him the door. He broke for it at a staggering run and
Ware’s Kid, with a Comanche yell, leaped upon his back and spurred him
through it, catching hold of the lintel and swinging down to the floor
as Bull Branch lurched through and fell sprawling upon the veranda floor
outside.

When he came back, the bartender was half-crouched against the back-bar,
with eyes bulging. Bos’ Johnson and the other patrons were clinging to
the bar, some whooping feebly, others too weak to do more than shed
happy tears. Bos’ Johnson waggled a hand at the bartender.

“Set ’em up, bartender!” he gasped. “This ’n’s on the house. Ware! Mebbe
they won’t neveh hi’st no monument to you-all here, but Bull
Branch--he’ll re-membeh you-all plenty!”

                 *       *       *       *       *

Back in the sheriff’s office, Johnson turned suddenly serious again. He
sat staring at the wall, his harsh face rigid as if set in bronze. “I
got you-all into that trouble with Bull Branch,” Johnson said suddenly.
“Done it a-purpose.”

Ware’s Kid merely waited, brown face, gray-green eyes, revealing nothing
of his thoughts.

“Wondered if you-all really was Ware an’, if you was, how much o’ the
talk was so. Because--I shore do need some help!”

“Fer what?”

“To go out with me tonight an’ stand up to Sam Bass’s gang!”

Ware’s Kid studied the grimly earnest face. From the beginning he had
sensed something unusual about him. He thought that Johnson was usually
a happy-go-lucky cowpuncher and a man efficient with either hands or
weapons. He was used to judging men quickly and he began to like this
stocky deputy.

“A’ right!” he grunted curtly.

“You-all willin’?” cried Johnson. “Then here’s the layout. They’re goin’
to stick up the east-bound T & P ag’in at Eagle Ford. Figger folks won’t
be expectin’ lightnin’ to hit twict in the same place. Me ’n’ you, we’ll
be in the weeds ’long the track.”

“How-come just us two?”

“I could raise a posse,” Johnson admitted. “But--how’m I goin’ to know
the fellas I line up ain’t in with Bass? No! I’m goin’ to line my sights
on Simp Dunbar an’ before I let some dam’ spy carry word, I’ll go it by
myse’f!”

“Simp Dunbar? Who’s he?”

“He’s the skunk that killed my cousin, Billy Tucker! Two weeks ago, oveh
in Tarrant. Man! I’d give a black land farm to git me Simp Dunbar oveh
my front sight. An’ I shore will! ’T was like this. Bass’s outfit loped
up to a saloon on the aidge o’ Fort Worth, where Billy, he was havin’ a
drink. The’ was some kind o’ wranglin’, Billy bein’ the kind as won’t
back down fer no man livin’. Simp Dunbar--I’ve knowed him all my life
fer a useless cus an’ Billy knowed him, too--he shot from off to one
side. Billy an’ me, we helled around togetheh when we was kids. Punched
cows togetheh, out Menard-way. I--I thought a heap o’ Billy----”

Ware’s Kid nodded silently. Here was a man he understood. Understood his
vindictiveness, for it was in his own fierce Texan blood; understood his
willingness to take a hundred-to-one chance to face his enemy. More and
more, he liked Bos’ Johnson.

“A’ right. We’ll hunt ’em up,” he grunted. “How-come yuh know they’re
goin’ to be at Eagle Ford?”

“My spy told me. Had him a-watchin’ fer ’em last two weeks. That boy.”

Ware’s Kid stared silently at Johnson.

“What’s name that other little station--east o’ here?” he asked.

“Mesquite?”

“Didn’t even know there was one,” shrugged Ware’s Kid, with a ghost of a
grin. “Johnson, we’ll be at Mesquite, not Eagle Ford, tonight. Boy’s
lyin’. In with Bass, likely. Feelin’ I got, an’ mostly my feelin’s is
right.”

Johnson was won over to acceptance of the altered plan, if but
half-willingly. He admitted that he knew nothing much of the boy, who
had appeared in the office a month before offering to spy upon the Bass
gang.

“In with Bass!” repeated the Ranger. “Hell! He could’ve brought yuh lots
o’ news, ’fore this.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

They waited until nearly dark, then ate at a Chinese restaurant. It was
pitch-dark when they went swiftly to the stable where Johnson’s horse,
with the big stallion, had been fed an hour before. They saddled,
talking a little for the benefit of any ears that might be stretched
toward them, of the western road; that toward Eagle Ford.

For a couple of miles they rode swiftly eastward, then turned south on
the road to Mesquite. They were close to the railroad always, riding
through woodland. Johnson led, because of his knowledge of the country.
Soon he checked his mount and jerked the Winchester from its scabbard.
Ware’s Kid already cuddled his carbine in the crook of his arm. They
rode on again, slower, now.

Suddenly, not fifty yards ahead, a man scratched a match. The Ranger
jerked his carbine up. Gently he kneed the stallion around, feeling,
rather than seeing, that Johnson was doing likewise. There was no alarm
while they moved back a hundred yards and slipped off their animals.

“Let’s hitch the hawses an’ sneak up!” whispered Johnson.

They returned to the point from which they had seen the flare of that
match, the stocky deputy making no more sound than a shadow--than the
Ranger himself. Then they halted, squatting on their heels, to listen.
There was the sound of men moving, of horses, the hum of low-voiced,
jerky conversation.

“Late again!” a boyish voice complained. “Hell! You’d think we were
passengers, Sam, way the dam’ railroad’s treating us!”

“Don’t ye fret, Bub,” a harsh voice answered the youngster. “She’ll be
a-ramblin’ along right soon. Ingineer, he’ll see that log an’ he’ll jerk
her back onto her tail right suddent!”

“Ever’body lined up?” inquired a pleasant voice--Bass’s, Ware’s Kid
surmised. “Yuh-all know where yuh work?”

As the voices answered in affirmative grunts, the Ranger began moving
soundlessly to circle them to get nearer to the point where the train
would stop. Johnson followed until they were squatting in a little open
perhaps fifty feet from the track, sheltered by a fallen tree.

“You-all was shore right!” breathed Johnson. “Wouldn’t be nowheres else
in the world!”

Minutes ticked off, then there was the sound of the train, far away. The
rails before them began to hum. The train was upon robbers and officers
with a roar. Came a frantic squealing of brakes and the scream of the
whistle.

The train had barely halted when there was a rattle of shots along the
track. It was so dark that there was no clue to the robbers’ positions
save the orange flames that stab-stabbed the night. Ware’s Kid was
conscious that Johnson was gone from beside him. He wasted no time
thinking of that, but ran crouched over up to the track, where he could
fire at the robbers’ shot-flashes. From here he went into action with
coldly precise fire from the carbine.

“Who’s that dam’ jughead?” someone roared. Evidently, thought Ware’s
Kid, he was believed to be some misguided member of the gang, firing
into his own people.

From between the cars came shots to answer the gang, now. It was
pandemonium, there in the pitchy night, with the heavy roar of Colts and
the sharp, whiplike reports of rifles. A man could but guess, by the
relative positions of the flashes, at whom he shot.

The Ranger hardly expected to do much execution--his position made that
a matter of chance. But he was worrying the Bass men.

Suddenly a high, clear voice rang out, crying a name over and over
again, penetrating even the staccato din of the firing. “Simp Dunbar!
Where you-all? Simp Dunbar----”

A voice answered, but there was no diminution in the firing. Ware’s Kid
crawled down the track, having reloaded his carbine. With his first shot
a man cried out shrilly. He pumped the lever and--his carbine jammed. He
spat a bitter curse. He knew instantly what had happened--he had slipped
a .45 pistol cartridge into a .44 carbine.

A huge shape hurled itself at him. Mechanically, he threw up his carbine
and the oncoming man ran into it. Then Ware’s Kid, tugging at the butt
of his seldom-used Colt, leaped aside. A roar sounded, almost in his
ear. Then a hand caught his shoulder. Instinctively he stepped close to
his assailant, turned like a flash when a pistol brushed him; dropped
his Colt and caught the fellow’s gunhand with both of his and hung on
grimly.

“Somethin’s wrong, boys! Let’s git out o’ yere!” a cool, half-laughing
voice was shouting, down the track--not the voice which had called Simp
Dunbar’s name.

The fellow with whom Ware’s Kid grappled was swinging terrific blows at
his lighter opponent. But the Ranger’s head was against his chest; the
big fellow’s fists but grazed their mark. But he was tiring with his
bulldog grip on the other’s gunhand. Suddenly he released his hold and
tried to leap backward. A heel caught on a bunch of grass and he
stumbled. A flash and roar from in front of him; a stinging pain across
his head. He crashed flat.

                 *       *       *       *       *

He came to, conscious of a dull headache and, next, of a dim light over
his head. After a moment of blinking, he perceived that he was sitting
in a chair of a railway coach. Next he realized that the train was
moving.

“How d’ you-all feel, now?” inquired an anxious voice.

Painfully he turned his head and saw Bos’ Johnson’s worried face
opposite him.

“Right puny!” he grunted truthfully.

Johnson grinned widely, relief in his brown eyes.

“What happened?” demanded Ware’s Kid.

“Bullet creased you-all. You-all been pickin’ daisies might’ nigh a
hour.”

“The hell! Where we goin’? Gang git away?”

“Goin’ into Dallas. Yeh, gang high-tailed it--all but Simp Dunbar,” said
Johnson. “Reckon they’ll most all be a-lickin’ some sore spots, though.
Me ’n’ you-all did right smart o’ shootin’! I hollered fer Simp an’ like
a dam’ jughead, he spoke right up. I snuck up onto him an’ told him who
I was.”

He lifted his arm and in the loose flannel of his shirt beneath it,
showed a great hole with charred edges.

“Might’ nigh got me, first crack! But I worked buttonholes up an’ down
his front ’fore he could shoot ag’in!”

“How-come yuh found me?”

“By lookin’ around,” shrugged Johnson affectionately. “You dam’ red-eyed
li’l runt! You-all think I’d hike out an’ leave you-all out there,
some’r’s, fer the gang, mebbe, to find? I come runnin’ up about the time
you-all tumbled; see that hairpin right on top me--an’ me with an empty
gun! I yelled like a Comanche an’ damned if he neveh broke an’ run.”

Ware’s Kid eyed him steadily. He knew that only Johnson’s arrival had
kept his assailant from putting another bullet into him as he lay
unconscious.

He leaned back wearily in the seat. Johnson stretched his bowed legs
comfortably and took off his Stetson.

“Wisht I had a chaw,” he grumbled.

“Got the makin’s.” Ware’s Kid fumbled in his jumper pocket.

“Don’t use her thet-a-way. I neveh could learn to smoke, some way.”

He threw his head back and closed his eyes. And the Ranger, watching
him, turned suddenly cold all over. For upon the brown, sinewy neck that
had been always hidden heretofore by the silken neckerchief, shone a
long white scar that stretched evenly three quarters of the way around
it.

A stocky, dark-faced, dark-eyed man, with a white scar circling evenly
around his neck--so Simeon Rutter and the O-Bar hands had described Dell
Spreen. True, they had seen him clean-shaven, and, believing him guilty
of murder, they remembered his features and eyes as murderous. But there
was no doubt about it--Dell Spreen sat there across from him with closed
eyes. And to Dell Spreen he owed his life that night!

“Dell Spreen!” he called in a low voice.

Bos’ Johnson moved like a cat, to half-draw his Colt. Then he saw the
derringer that covered him with twin barrels. For an instant he
hesitated, then shoved the Colt back into its holster and slumped.

“So you-all come afteh _me_,” he said. “I been lookin’ fer somebody to
show up. That’s why I got me a job as dep’ty. Figgered whoever come’d
spill his tale in the office an’, seein’ me wearin’ a badge, wouldn’t
suspicion me. Specially since I neveh used my own name in the O-Bar
country. But you-all shore fooled me.”

“Hate like hell to do it!” Ware’s Kid wriggled miserably. “But I’m a
Ranger. Do anything I can to help yuh, Johnson. Much as I’d do fer my
own blood kin. But I got to take yuh back.”

“I ain’t blamin’ you-all. But--might’s well shoot me right now as to put
me up ’fore a jury in that country. Ever’thing’s ag’inst me--specially
bein’ a strangeh. That’s why I high-tailed it, soon’s I heerd he’d been
found.

“I ain’t denyin’ I went to the O-Bar fig-gerin’ I’d mebbe have to kill
Carson. I was goin’ to git back the money he stole off’n my brotheh an’
sisteh. Goin’ to git it back or try the case before Jedge Colt. But if
I’d killed him, it’d been from the front. He’d have been give a chanct
to fill his hand.”

“Yuh--yuh mean yuh never killed him?” cried Ware’s Kid.

Then the old surge of hope died. Of course Johnson would say that.

“D’ you-all figger me that-a-way? Knowin’ no more about me than you do?”
Johnson asked.

Slowly, the Ranger shook his head.

“Looky yere!” argued the deputy. “Eph’ Carson an’ my brotheh. Sam, they
was ranchin’ it oveh on the Brazos. Carson’s a tough _hombre_, remember.
He’s gamblin’ a lot. Well, he sells ever’ last head o’ stuff on the
place while Sam’s down in Fort Worth. Time Sam gits back with my
kid-sisteh that’s got a share in the ranch, Carson’s done gambled away
the money. The’s a row, o’ course. Sam, he’s got more guts than
gun-sense. Carson nigh kills him.

“Time I come into it, Carson’s rattled his hocks. Two years afteh, I’m
ridin’ down in the El Paso country. Hear about Eph’ Carson o’ the O-Bar.
I go high-tailin’ it oveh an’ hang around four-five days, but Carson
don’t come. Then I start out fer Crow Point a-huntin’ him.

“Then, hell bent, comes the Mex’ cooks’ helper-boy. I kept a cowboy from
beatin’ him to death, one day. Says Carson’s killed an’ robbed an’
ever’body says I must’ve killed him! Well, whut do I do? Try to tell
them red-eyed O-Bar boys as how I was intendin’ to kill Eph’ Carson,
mebbe, but neveh got no chanct? Like hell! I figger the job I come to do
is done. I leave that-’ere country in a mile-high cloud o’ dust.”

Ware’s Kid slumped lower in the seat, going over and over his mental
picture of the scene of the crime.

Bos’ Johnson rose to cup his hands against the window glass and peer out
into the night. Missing no slightest movement of his prisoner, the
Ranger studied again the wide, powerful shoulders, the handy legs of the
man who has ridden almost since birth. Johnson turned slowly.

“Dallas! Be in soon,” he said. “Then--I ain’t blamin’ you-all none,
Ware. But just--well sort o’ between us. I wisht I could make you
believe I never done it. I sort o’ took to you-all from the beginnin’
an----”

“’T ain’t a bit o’ use,” interrupted Ware’s Kid.

A tiny smile was born far back in the gray-green eyes; seemed to spread
over the habitually blank brown face and come finally to rest upon the
thin-lipped mouth.

“’T ain’t a bit o’ use,” he repeated. “’Cause--I know yuh never done
it!”

Ostentatiously he returned the derringer to his jumper pocket.

“’S all right, Bos’. Yuh got to go down to Austin with me. Got to
exhibit yuh some to the adj’tant gin’ral, to make him _sabe_. But
that’ll be all. Listen: I went snoopin’ around some myself, down at
Carwell. Found where the fella that killed Eph’ Carson had waited. Point
one: there was two brown cigarette stubs on the ground. Yuh-all say yuh
don’t smoke, an’ the’s no stain on yo’ fingers.

“I found where this fella’s stood with his rifle in a sort o’ notch. His
foot-prints was still pretty plain. Well, yo’ feet, Bos’ point in, like
a pigeon’s. This fella’s showed in the soft dirt under the rock
overhang, a-pointin’ out!

“But point three’s the big ’n’: I stand five foot seven, an’ that notch
he rested his Winchester in was level with my eyes. Short as yuh-all
are, it’d be mighty near over yo’ head! Now, he never stood on nothin’,
’cause the’ ain’t nothin’ the’ to stand on. An’ he never fired from no
saddle. ’Cause I found where his hawse’d been tied back in the brush.”

“Man, but you-all shore wiped some cold sweat off’n me!” cried Bos’
Johnson. “I knowed I neveh done it, but provin’ it, the way you-all just
done, neveh would’ve come to me. I reckon.”

“Took a bigger man than ary one of us. That’s what we’re goin’ to show
the adj’tant gin’ral. Then I’m goin’ to ask him to let me go back to
Carwell to find the fella that really done the killin’. He’ll let me go.
An’----”

“If he does,” cried Bos’ Johnson very earnestly, “man! The’s shore some
six-footehs down in that Carwell country as’ll be up in the air two ways
to onct!”

                 *       *       *       *       *

Up out of the glaring yellow sand, the long, low, narrow barrier of
black rock jutted abruptly. “El Castillo”--the Castle, the Mexicans had
named it, long ago. The name such names fitted as well as such names
usually do. Actually it more resembled a stone fence fifty yards long,
which, in height, varied from three to ten feet and, in thickness, from
a foot to four, even five, feet. The top was jagged--sharp saw teeth of
slick, inky rock. A sinister pile, even in the white sunlight of a
desert forenoon.

Ware’s Kid squatted on spurred heels at the Castle’s western end, where
the trail forked to run on either side of the wall. Not much of a trail,
this--the deep, loose, perpetually-drifting sand soon effaced
impressions; but generations of travel had made a lane between walls of
greasewood and cat-claw and cactus.

It was near the Ranger’s position, on this dimly-marked track, that Eph
Carson had died--shot from the saddle without a chance to return the
murderer’s fire.

Having left Dell Spreen in the care of the adjutant general in Austin
and returned swiftly to Carwell, Ware’s Kid had come without being
observed to the scene of the murder. Now that he knew Spreen had not
committed the killing, he must decide who did.

“Satisfied the adj’tant gin’ral Spreen neveh done it,” reflected the
Ranger. “But I got to figure out who did. Spreen’s too little. Good-size
hombre plugged Eph Carson.”

He got up and the great, black stallion, which had stood behind him as
he squatted, now followed like a dog to the spot where Eph Carson’s
murderer had lain in wait. Ware’s Kid knew the place well.

“Fella leaned up agin’st the rock, right here,” he re-enacted the scene
mentally. “Lined his sights on Carson. Carson was comin’ up t’ other
side from over Crow Point way. Fella drilled him plumb center. Went out
an’ took seven thousand out o’ Carson’s saddle bags. Stood right here.
Standin’ on the ground. No hawss-tracks closer’n that cat-claw yonder.
Good-size’ fella. Had to be, to rest his rifle in that crotch.”

Mechanically he studied the rock wall and the sand that swept away from
its foot. Something bright in the sand, in the very spot where they had
found the murderer’s tracks. He stooped. But it was only a glassy bit of
rock. He held it, staring absently, his mind upon the mystery. From the
little sand dunes behind him, to northward, came the flat, vicious
report of a rifle. A bullet slapped the rock wall almost in his face. It
had passed within six inches of his head. Instantly, another followed.

Ware’s Kid moved like a rattler striking. He moved automatically, but
with a precision, an economy, of movement that could not have been
bettered by rehearsals times without number. He was sheltered from the
bullets within two steps, standing behind his stallion’s bulk. His hand
slapped the saddle horn; he was in the saddle without touching stirrups
and lying flat upon the black’s neck. The great rowels dug the
stallion’s flanks; he surged forward magnificently; within two strides
he was galloping. The Ranger, chased by bullets that buzzed spitefully
about his ears, swung the black around the end of the Castle.

Half-way down the length of the stone wall he slid the stallion to a
halt. Here was a place where he could peer across the top between two
teeth of rock. His great sombrero hung down his back by the chinstrap;
from the scabbard beneath the left fender had leaped a sleek Winchester
carbine. He cuddled the carbine in the crook of his arm as, with
green-gray eyes squinting coldly, he studied the sand dunes behind which
his antagonist lay hidden.

A thin smoke-cloud was drifting upward above the dunes. Ware’s Kid
rested the carbine in the crotch of the wall-top. He sighted carefully
and drove three .44’s to dust along the crest of the dunes, some fifteen
inches apart. Instantly the other rifleman replied with a rolling
quartette of bullets that bunched most efficiently beneath the Ranger’s
carbine-muzzle.

He watched narrowly without replying in kind. At last he shrugged and
whirled the stallion, to ride off south and east toward the O-Bar
ranch-house.

He could have stalked the sand dunes from which the unknown bushwhacker
had fired. There was cover of a sort up to the very base of the dunes.
But the ambusher’s fire had been entirely too craftsmanlike, too nearly
deadly, to make the prospect of scaling the low slope before him seem
anything but the brief preliminary to a funeral. Ware’s Kid preferred to
ride off with a whole skin and calculate upon another meeting under
conditions more equal. They said of him, in the Rangers, that for a
youngster no more than nineteen he had a mighty level head.

A half-mile, perhaps, he galloped without turning. Then, reaching for
the field glasses, he checked the stallion. Far behind him, a horseman
streaked it eastward. The Ranger studied rider and brown horse through
the glasses.

“Mebbe he’s tall,” he grunted at last. “But--mebbe he’s just a-forkin’ a
little pony.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

For ten miles he kept the stallion at a mile-eating running walk. He had
never been at the O-Bar house, but he knew its location from hearsay,
and so, when the black began climbing a steady incline, studded by
boulders and covered with taller-than-ordinary mesquite, he nodded to
himself. This was the way, all right.

The stallion made the incline’s top and paused for a moment, expelling
its breath in a great snort. At the sound, the flaxen-haired girl on the
lookout rock turned sharply. She and Ware’s Kid stared, one at another,
her great, dark eyes meeting his narrowed gaze levelly.

“Howdy!” he drawled, after a--to him--long and uncomfortable silence. He
was always ill at ease with women. They usually wanted a man to make
some sort of damned fool of himself to suit a feminine whim.

“Good morning,” she replied, still examining him calmly.

“Trail to the O-Bar?” he grunted awkwardly, after another silence.

“Yes. The house is a mile away. But there’s nobody there except the cook
and his helper. Do you want to see my father, Sim Rutter?”

Ware’s Kid stared. He recalled nothing about a daughter on the O-Bar.
And that Simeon Rutter, huge, gaunt, black-haired, black-eyed,
black-bearded, grim and taciturn, should have such a daughter as this
slim, fair-skinned creature seemed somehow unbelievable. She seemed to
read his thoughts.

“I’ve been away at school--Las Cruces--convent, you know,” she
enlightened. “But I’m not going back--I hope.”

“Stay here, huh?”

“I hope not! This is just as bad. Oh, I hate this bare, desolate
country! Don’t you?”

“Don’t know,” shrugged Ware’s Kid. He had never thought about the
matter, one way or the other. “Don’t know--as I do.”

“I want to go back East! To New York--Philadelphia--Boston--oh, all the
places I’ve read about. Europe, too. I’m trying to get my father to sell
the ranch and go traveling with me. All over the world. I’ve been trying
to persuade him for two years. But I think he’ll do it now--maybe. His
partner was killed, you know. He’s all broken up over that. He doesn’t
say much, but it was an awful blow just the same. I think he’ll sell
out.”

“Got to be goin’,” grunted Ware’s Kid. All this talk of travel was over
his head. Nor had it anything to do with his particular business--the
capture of Eph Carson’s murderer.

“I’ll ride with you. Will you get my horse? He’s tied to a cat-claw over
yonder.”

The Ranger got the pony and brought it back. He sat his stallion,
holding her animal’s reins. She waited for an instant, but he was blind
to her expectation that he would help her into the saddle. So she swung
up unaided and jerked the reins from his hand.

As they rode almost stirrup-to-stirrup toward the ranch-house, Ware’s
Kid studied her covertly from beneath half-lowered sombrero brim. It
dawned upon him suddenly that not yet had he seen her smile. The large,
blue eyes were somber, always; she seemed to brood upon something. They
rode in silence until, a half-mile or so ahead, the clutter of buildings
which constituted the O-Bar holding showed against the desert shrubbery.

“I hate it!” she burst out. “Oh, how I hate it!”

Then they rode on silently again, the creak of saddle-leather, the
scuffing of the animals’ hoofs, the only sound, until they dismounted in
the ranch yard.

There was but one horse in the cottonwood-log corral, a black gelding as
large as the mount of Ware’s Kid. The girl glanced at it, then toward
the house.

“My father’s home,” she said tonelessly.

“Come in.”

They went around the house and, upon the rough veranda that shaded its
front, found Simeon Rutter with feet cocked upon the rail, big, shaggy
head upon his chest. He looked up at the sound of their footsteps and
sun-narrowed black eyes softened amazingly as he saw his daughter.

“Hello, Baby!” he rumbled. “Wonderin’ where yuh was.” Then, to Ware’s
Kid, “Howdy, Kid. What’re yuh doin’ down here ag’in? Thought they sent
yuh up to Austin, or some’r’s.”

“Did. But sent me back. I got Dell Spreen.”

“Yuh did! That’s shore good hearin’, Kid!” He came swiftly to his feet,
with great hands hard-clenched.

The girl had gone indoors and bitterly, yet with a certain grim
repression, Simeon Rutter cursed Dell Spreen.

“Where’s Spreen, now?” he demanded, breaking off suddenly. “Carwell? El
Paso?”

“Austin. Lookin’ up more evidence.”

Simeon Rutter cursed the law’s dawdling ways; its coddling of an
assassin. Ware’s Kid but half-listened. He was thinking of the efficient
rifleman of the morning, who had bushwhacked him from the sand dunes.

“How many big men in this country?” he asked abruptly. “_Big_ men?”

Rutter stopped short to stare at him. Then he considered the question,
eyes narrowed thoughtfully.

“Don’t know. Me, o’ course. An’ Curly Gonzales over Crow Point way.
Lamson--that crazy puncher on the D-5--an’ Slim Nichols on the Flyin’ A.
All I think of. Why?”

The Ranger hesitated. Knowing Rutter’s bitterness toward Dell Spreen, he
wondered if the dour ranchman could be made to believe his own theory:
that Spreen had not, could not have, committed the murder. Wondered,
too, if Rutter would be silent about the theory.

“Spreen says he never killed Carson,” he said slowly.

“Yeh. An’ what?”

“An’ if he did--well, I don’t know how he done it!”

“What’re yuh drivin’ at? Yuh got the name o’ bein’ level-headed, Kid,
but--what’re yuh drivin’ at?”

“How could a little fella--littler’n me--shoot Carson, restin’ his gun
in a crotch near as high as he could reach?”

Scowling, Simeon Rutter considered this problem.

“That _was_ a high crotch--one that we found his tracks under,” he
admitted. “But, hell! He was sittin’ on a hawss, or else standin’ on
somethin’. Not good enough, Kid! By God, not half good enough to make me
believe Dell Spreen never shot old Eph Carson from hidin’. O’ course he
denies it! ’Spect him to own right up?”

“Yeh. Course, he’d say he never. But I been thinkin’. Wasn’t no
hawss-tracks under the crotch. Nothin’ to stand on. Nothin’ we could
see, anyhow. So’ wondered who’d be tall enough to shoot out o’ that
crotch, standin’ on the sand. An’ too----”

He hesitated for an instant before he decided to tell of the morning.

“An’, too, somebody bushwhacked me, out at the Castle, today!”

“Bushwhacked yuh! What for? Who’d be a-bushwhackin’ yuh?”

“Don’t know. Fella on a dun. Good shot, too. Purty good, that is.”

“Here!” cried Rutter suddenly. “Too much funny business about this. I
want to see that place ag’in. Git yo’ hawss, Kid. Let’s take a _pasear_
out to the Castle an’ look around.”

He went swiftly down to the corral and got the lariat from his saddle.
The black gelding retreated to a corner, snorting, whirling. Rutter sent
the loop spinning over its head and hauled the animal to him by sheer
brute force.

“So dam’ many hawsses none gits rid enough!” he rumbled irritably.
“Wilder’n antelope, all of ’em.”

He saddled swiftly and swung up. Ware’s Kid was already mounted. They
turned past the front veranda and Rutter waved to his daughter, who had
come outside again. He seemed another person when near her. The grim
shell of him cracked and a tenderness odd in a man so apparently
harsh-grained showed for a moment.

“Goin’ out to El Castillo!” he shouted at the girl. “Back when I git
back, Baby.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

They rode silently for miles. Rutter was one after the Ranger’s own
heart, taciturn, efficient in his business. Staring at his companion’s
broad back, Ware’s Kid nodded approval. He thought of what the girl had
said--of her father’s repressed sorrow over his partner’s death. He
could understand Rutter’s vengefulness toward Dell Spreen, but he hoped,
before the day’s end, to show the O-Bar owner his error, to prove that
Spreen could not have murdered Eph Carson.

“If yuh’re right about this height business,” Rutter growled suddenly,
“I don’t know what we’re goin’ to do about it. Too long ago, now. Not
that I’m admittin’ yuh’re right! But just in case yuh are, how can we
find out where these fellas--Curly Gonzales an’ Lamson an’ Nichols--was
that day? Fella don’t always recollect just what he was doin’ three
months ago. By George!”

He whirled sideway in the saddle.

“That mornin’, me an’ August Koenig--one o’ my hands--was ridin’ nawth
o’ the house nine-ten mile. An’ we met Lamson headin’ for Elizario!
Recollect, now. August an’ Lamson come near mixin’ it, ’count August he
was askin’ about some widder that lives in Elizario an’ Lamson flew off
the handle! By George!”

“What kind o’ fella’s Lamson?” inquired Ware’s Kid.

“Oh, same’s most. Gits kind o’ crazy spells. Been kicked on the head a
long time ago by a bronc’ an’ once in a while he flies up. But he’s a
good puncher an’ I don’t know why anybody’ll think he’d shoot Eph
Carson. Lamson’s seen trouble--seen it fair an’ square, through the
smoke. No-o, I wouldn’t put him down for that kind o’ killer.”

“Yuh found Carson right after noon, didn’t yuh?”

“Yeh. I got fidgety, him not comin’ in the day I figgered. So when me
an’ August got back to the house, an’ Eph hadn’t come in yet, I took
August an’ Yavapai Wiggins an’ we rode out. Found Eph ’long about two
o’clock, lyin’ in the trail. Seven thousand, about, he was packin’. All
gone.”

“Mostly yo’s, they say.”

“’Bout four thousand,” Rutter nodded gloomily. “But ’t wasn’t the money
riled me so. Old Eph, he never knowed what hit him. Never had a chanct.
Nary chanct to git his six-shooter out. Like I told yuh then, right
after it happened. I figgered Dell Spreen ’cause he’d hung around the
ranch three days, waitin’ for Eph. Wouldn’t tell nobody what he wanted.
Just looked mean. An’ packed his cantinas an’ hightailed it that very
mawnin’. I gethered yuh never found the money on him?”

“Fo’ dollars, ’bout,” shrugged Ware’s Kid.

They came to the Castle and reined in the animals on the spot where the
murderer of Eph Carson had waited. Silently, Simeon Rutter stared at the
crotch in the rock wall in which the assassin had rested his
rifle-barrel. Slowly, as unwilling even now to concede weight to the
theory the Ranger had advanced tentatively, he nodded.

“The’ wasn’t no hawss-tracks closer’n that cat-claw yonder,” he
admitted.

He swung down and pulled his Winchester from its scabbard, then moved
over to the crotch in the wall. Even for one of his height it was a
strain to level the barrel with butt at shoulder. He nodded again and
set the rifle down. From a shirt pocket he brought Durham and papers and
shook tobacco onto the brown leaf, somber black eyes roving.

Ware’s Kid slipped from the saddle and came swiftly over to where Rutter
stood. He stopped and dug into the sand at the rancher’s feet, then
straightened.

“What’s it?” asked Rutter.

It was a large, pearl-handled pocketknife, tarnished from much carrying,
with four good blades and one broken blade stump. Rutter licked his
cigarette, jambed it into his mouth and took the knife from the Ranger’s
hand, staring thoughtfully.

“See it before?” asked Ware’s Kid. Rutter shook his head.

“Umm--no, reckon not. Not many like that carried in this country. But
somebody ought to know it. We’ll ride into Carwell pretty soon. See. But
right now I want to ride Eph Carson’s back-trail. Got a idee. Mebbe she
won’t pan out.”

They could only guess that Eph Carson had come along the regular trail
and follow through the dim lane between the greasewood and cacti. They
rode silently, with eyes roving from trail to skyline and back again.
The afternoon wore on; evening came. To westward, up-thrusting hulls,
jagged, fantastic, drew nearer.

“Huecos!” grunted Rutter, and Ware’s Kid nodded. He knew this ancient
watering place of the desert people red and brown and white. A good many
times, with a Ranger detachment from Ysleta, hunting Apache sign, he had
camped there.

“Guess we better hole up there t’night,” Rutter grunted, staring across
the flat to the beginning of that welter of arroyo-cut hillocks.
“Mawnin’ we can head back to Carwell an’ see ’bout that frogsticker. Or,
we can look over some more trail.”

“Yo’ idee?” queried Ware’s Kid. “Yuh said yuh had one.”

“Tell yuh about it come mawnin’,” said Rutter. Far back in the grim
black eyes lurked a shadowy amusement. “Ain’t quite ready to back her up
clean to the tailgate. Got anything to eat?”

“Dried beef, _tortillas_, coffee, can o’ plums.”

“Dried beef an’ _tortillas_ is a meal,” grinned Rutter. “Le’s head for
the Tanks an’ camp.”

“Better hole up in the old Butterfield station,” counseled Ware’s Kid.
“Healthier’n sleepin’ ’longside the main _tinaja_ (Tank). Apaches don’t
stick no closer to the reservation than ever, I reckon.”

“Not so close, by God!” swore Rutter. “Yuh’re right, Kid. Them dam’
feather dusters stops here or at Crow Springs or the Comudas, reg’lar,
comin’ from Mescalero to Chihuahua. Stage station she is. We’ll make
it.”

They nodded mutual agreement and spurred the horses on through the dark.
At the deserted stage station--a rude dwelling made by walling in the
mouth of a natural cavern--they swung down. The Ranger sniffed like a
hunting dog.

“Some seep water up the canyon a piece,” he muttered. “Good enough for
the hawsses. But I’ll take the canteen an’ git some real water at the
Tank, for us.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

He unsaddled the black stallion and swiftly Rutter followed his example.
Rutter got out the food and coffee pot from the Ranger’s saddle bags
while the latter, bearing a canteen, started up the canyon to the main
“tank.”

Ware’s Kid moved silently, for all his high-heeled boots. The canyon
floor was of hard-packed earth, but studded with loose stones and he
placed his feet carefully. One never knew who might be using the Tanks.
From time immemorial it had been one of the favorite watering places of
this region. Wild animals and wild men, red and brown and white, came
there furtively.

He passed close along the left-hand wall, decorated with Indian
pictographs and the names of pioneers, and so came to the low cavern in
which was the spring-fed well, or “tank.” More cautiously than ever he
moved now. The rock apron before the cavern was pitted with
_metate_-holes, where prehistoric tribes had ground their corn; rude
mortars still used by the Apaches who camped there. It was tricky
footing and trickier still inside, where one approached the well-lip
over a stone floor worn slick as glass by countless feet.

Inside the cavern mouth he squatted for a moment and listened. He heard
nothing from without or within and slid his feet carefully forward,
balancing himself with left hand upon a rounded slab that divided the
cavern in two sections.

So he was awkwardly balanced when a sinewy arm shot around his throat
from behind and a _hough_ sounded in his ear.

A smallish, rather insignificant-seeming figure was Ware’s Kid. But “all
whalebone and whang-leather,” as the Rangers who had wrestled with him
remarked amazedly; a hundred and ten pounds of wiry, dashingly quick,
steel-strong body.

Now he moved automatically, fairly shouting, “Indians!” Sideways he
whirled, and so the Apache’s knife went wide in its downward drive. Back
shot the Ranger’s head, to smash into the Indian’s face. It broke his
strangling hold and Ware’s Kid, turning half in air, his feet were
sliding so, shot a vicious fist into the Apache’s midriff, then had the
buck by the throat and was gripping him about the body with legs closing
like scissor-blades and fending off flailing arms with elbows spread.

The Apache was powerful, but before he had much opportunity to struggle
Ware’s Kid had banged his back-head against the rock. He managed a long,
loud, gasping groan. Feebly his knifehand rose. The Ranger loosed the
throat for an instant and fumbled for the weapon. It sliced his palm.
Then he seized it and buried it in the Indian’s body.

When the Apache was limp--wise men made very sure that Apaches were
really dead--the Ranger stood up shakily and groped for the entrance. A
stone slid down into the canyon and he hurled himself forward out of the
cavern. As he gained the middle of the canyon, running like a
quarter-horse, there was thud after thud of feet dropping from the rocks
to the hard ground.

He ran on his toes, hoping that he could make camp sufficiently ahead of
these fleet Indians to warn Rutter; hoping, too, that Rutter had the
horses together, had not taken them out onto the flat to graze. He ran
as he never had run in his life.

At last he sensed the camp just ahead. And from it came a rifle-shot,
then another. The bullets sang past him perilously close.

“It’s--Ware’s Kid!” he gasped. “Injuns--comin’!”

“Thought yuh was one of ’em!” grunted Rutter, with no particular alarm
evident in his heavy voice. “How close?”

“Right behind! No time to saddle! Fork ’em bareback!”

He paused only to snatch his precious carbine from its scabbard on the
saddle, then scooped up the bight of the lariat with which the stallion
was picketed. He vaulted upon the stallion’s back. Muffled sound in the
darkness nearby told that Rutter was following his example.

Up the canyon the darkness was suddenly punctuated in a half-dozen
places by orange flames. Bullets thudded into the ground, into rock
walls, around the white men. The firing was a continuous roll, its
rumbling multiplied by the canyon walls. As usual the Apaches had rifles
as good as any in that country, better than those of the Army. Rutter
swore venomously.

Ware’s Kid had slashed the lariat with his belt knife. Rutter,
apparently, had done the same. For when the black stallion surged ahead,
toward the safety of the open land, Rutter was close behind. They
galloped furiously for perhaps half an hour. The moon came out and
flooded the desert with a white light that reminded the Ranger of Billy
Conant’s New Fashion Saloon in El Paso when the electric lights were
turned on.

Being lighter and, perhaps, the better rider, Ware’s Kid led. He had
lost a hundred-dollar saddle, but he was phlegmatic about that. It was
all in the game. They were lucky--he especially--to be riding away with
their hair. A sudden groan from Rutter aroused him from his thoughts and
he looked backward under his arm in time to see the big man slide
sideways off his gelding and roll over upon his side.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Mechanically Ware’s Kid whirled the stallion and glared half-a-dozen
ways at once in search of the assassin. But the broad expanse of
greasewood and cacti lay quiet in the incandescent moonlight. So he rode
back to Rutter and slid to the sand.

“Got me!” Rutter gasped. “Back yonder. Thought I--could make it--back to
the ranch--see--my girl--but----”

“Let’s see,” grunted Ware’s Kid practically.

He explored the blood-caked shirt-front and lifted a shoulder-point in a
little gesture of fatalistic resignation. There was a .44 hole in
Rutter’s chest. How he had ridden this far was the marvel! The Ranger
squatted there broodingly, watching mechanically along the back-trail,
in case the Indians appeared.

“Want me to--sign a paper?”

At the painful whisper, Ware’s Kid looked down curiously into Rutter’s
grim-lined face.

“Shore,” he nodded, after a moment, thinking to humor a delirious man.
“If it’ll ease yuh.”

“Knowed yuh--had the deadwood on me--when yuh--found my knife! But I
--wasn’t goin’ to--let yuh see Carwell ag’in--ever! Yuh tried to--make
out yuh never--suspicioned. But I knowed! I’d’ve got yuh--’fore mawnin’.
Dam’ near got yuh--yeste’day mawnin’--at the Castle. Seen yuh--pokin’
round--pick up somethin’--skeered me an’--I whanged away. Hadn’t
missed--wouldn’t be here. ’Twas on the--cards--I reckon.”

He stopped wearily, breathing in labored wheezes. Ware’s Kid squatted
beside him, staring down with expressionless face. Suddenly Rutter’s
wheezes became louder, quicker. After a moment the Ranger understood
that it was horrible laughter.

“Reckon my gal--will do her travelin’--now. Always after me--to sell
out. I done for Eph Carson--’count o’ that. None o’ that--money was
mine. All his’n. I wanted it. I----”

His voice trailed off into incoherent mumbling. Ware’s Kid bethought
himself suddenly of what Rutter had said about signing a paper. He
fumbled in his jumper pocket and found a letter of the adjutant general,
the letter which had summoned him to Austin three months ago and so had
brought him, indirectly, to sit here tonight. A stub of pencil was
there, too.

“A’ right!” he snapped. “Sign the paper!”

He supported the murderer’s head and shoulders and crooked his knee so
that Rutter could lay the paper upon it. It was slow, painful work, but
at last he held the curt scrawl up in the moonlight and painfully
spelled it out:

	Dell spreen never killed eph Carson I done it and robbed
	him--Simeon Rutter.

Presently Rutter died--without pain, apparently. Ware’s Kid rolled a
cigarette and lit it, staring blankly straight ahead.

“He shore fooled me!” he grunted admiringly. “He shore did! An’ like to
killed me twict! At the Castle an’ tonight. He never took me for no
Injun. He was aimin’ to down me. Just fools’ luck I’m here, alive an’
kickin’, an’ with this-here paper.”

He got up, thinking to ride for Carwell and tell his story: show the
confession. Suddenly he thought of the girl, the wistful-eyed, sad-faced
girl at the O-Bar ranch-house. He squatted again and made another
cigarette.

Slowly but surely, he mulled the business over. It came to him finally
that there were really but two persons to be considered--Dell Spreen,
sitting around the adjutant general’s office up at Austin, and that girl
of Rutter’s. Absolute vindication of Spreen was easy; the means lay in
his hand, here. But that would mean a blow at a girl who had had no part
in her father’s cold-blooded deed. He pondered the problem. At last, he
nodded.

He would ride back to Carwell, but the paper would remain in his jumper
pocket. He would tell of Rutter’s death; lead a posse after the Apaches.
He would also show the townsfolk the spot from which Eph Carson had been
shot and explain the impossibility of Dell Spreen--a man shorter, even,
than himself--committing the murder. This might not clear up the mystery
to everyone’s satisfaction, but Dell Spreen had no intention of coming
back to this part of the country anyway. When the adjutant general saw
the confession it would clear Spreen officially.

Then the girl would not be branded--openly, at least--as the daughter of
a brutal, callous murderer. She would have no ordeal to face while the
O-Bar was being sold. She would carry away no bitter memories to mark
her in after-years.

Something like this Ware’s Kid thought out. He got up again and snapped
his fingers to the black stallion, caught the trailing lariat and again
threw a hackamore around the black’s nose, then vaulted upon it with
carbine across his arm.

“Reckon she’s poor law--this way,” he reflected. “But she’s shore as
hell good Rangerin’!”

              The Knickerbocker Press, New Rochelle, N. Y.




INTRODUCTION


Max Nordau is perhaps the most daring toreador of recent years. He
challenged Modern Civilization to mortal combat in the presence of
assembled thousands. Had the customs of the Roman arena prevailed, the
thumbs of the interested spectators would doubtless have been extended
or pressed down in about equal numbers, when the huge beast lay
momentarily stunned by his blow. That Nordau had ingeniously tormented
the monster was apparent; had he earned the right to put an end to
its existence? The shrill cries of the excitable and easily moved
predominated for a moment, but they were soon drowned by the insistent
demands of the sober-minded for a calm consideration of the fairness of
the blows that had been struck, as well as of the permissibility of the
weapons that had been used. Yet the contest, whether fair or unfair,
had been exciting; and it was not without its uses.

It stimulated thought among the habitually unthinking. The habit of
reflective analysis, like letter-writing and other accomplishments that
require much leisure, is slipping away from us under the pressure of
our complex modern life. The newspaper, with its surges of insensate
passion and unreasoned opinion, thinks for large portions of the
community; and its thinking, like the amusements of the nursery,
expresses itself in ways that appeal chiefly to the eye and to the
ear. Information about things is too often mistaken for knowledge of
things. Highly specialized activities on the one hand, and the task of
adjusting our part in the struggle for existence to economic conditions
wholly new in the world’s history, on the other, mark off our
civilization from any that have preceded it. The activities of modern
men are so numerous, so varied, and so interesting, that we often omit
to ask on what principles they are based and whither they are tending.
Apparent success has led us to forget sometimes that all sound practice
has a reason behind it, and reasons are seldom asked for or given.

To say the least, then, it is somewhat surprising to be stopped on
the street corner and assured, with due emphasis and the appearance
of authority, that nineteenth-century men and women are absorbed in
interests that mark a diseased type of mind, and are given over to a
literature, an art, and a music that, themselves produced by madmen,
are rapidly reducing us all to the mad-house level; in other words,
that we and our boasted civilization are degenerates.

There is, as I have said, a certain use in this brutal proceeding, for
it causes us to stop and think. It shatters our conceit and shakes our
confidence. If we pause only for a moment, yet pause we must. The mere
daring of the attack forces this. So it has come about that Nordau’s
_Degeneration_, quite apart from its intrinsic merits or demerits, has
been widely read and much talked of throughout the civilized world. It
has provoked some anger, not a little amusement, and a fair measure
of contempt. Yet in a certain subtle way it has set us to examining
the reasons that lead most of us to deny the essential viciousness and
abnormality of some of the most salient and striking characteristics of
contemporary culture.

If Nordau’s indictment be classed as pessimism, it at least has the
merit of novelty of statement. From Homer’s time to the present poets
and philosophers have not forgotten, even in moments of highest
exaltation, to remind man that his life has a dark and hopeless side.
Our own century has listened to Leopardi, who envied only the dead,
and to Schopenhauer, who called man both the priest and the victim of
nature. And yet we have not been altogether unhappy.

But Nordau is no ordinary pessimist. He does not lead us to despair
through the by-paths of metaphysical subtlety, nor does he take
advantage of the awful mystery of pain to perplex and distract us.
Rather he drags us into the laboratory and, stretching us on a table
of definitions made for the purpose, proceeds to measure our faces
and our skulls, our teeth, the lobes of our ears, and our palates;
we pay the penalty of our individuality in being found to be “morbid
deviations from an original type,” and are therefore degenerate. Next
comes an examination of a selected group of man’s newer interests. The
music of Wagner, the dramas of Ibsen, the romances of Zola, the art of
the pre-Raphaelites, the mystics, the symbolists, the Parnassians—who
but a “decadent” would treat all these alike?—are passed in review
and pronounced to be proofs of the decadence of mankind even more
conclusive than those based upon physical measurements. All this is
done in the name of Science, which, reversing the procedure of Saturn,
thus hastens to devour the parent that begot it, Modern Civilization.

A long chapter might be written on the credulity of men of science.
The hypotheses that they have chased out of the door complacently fly
in at the window. Many scientists, fresh from apparently important
discoveries in narrow fields, need to be reminded of the lesson
contained in the legend of St. Augustine, who when walking on the shore
one day, absorbed in meditation, suddenly perceived a child that with
a shell was ladling the sea into a hole in the sand. “What are you
doing, my child?” asked St. Augustine. “I am emptying the ocean,” was
the reply, “into this hole.”—“That is impossible.” “Not more impossible
than for you to empty the universe into your intellect,” said the
child, and vanished. Nordau is particularly prone to regard the small
achievements of a certain school of alienists as having supplied him
with a conclusive test of all excellence. Indeed, no part of his
diatribe is more open to criticism than the use he makes of Science.
If modern science is demonstrating any one thing more clearly than
another, it is that the insights of the seers of our race as to the
highest human aspirations and the deepest needs of the human spirit,
meet not with contradiction but with support as knowledge of the cosmos
becomes more extensive and more accurate. Nordau has neglected to
reckon with the profound truth that finds expression in the celebrated
saying of Lotze:

“The more I myself have laboured to prepare the way for acceptance of
the mechanical view of Nature in the region of organic life—in which
region this view seemed to advance more timidly than the nature of the
thing required—the more do I now feel impelled to bring into prominence
the other aspect which was equally near to my heart during all these
endeavours.... It is in such mediation [between the two aspects] that
the true source of the life of science is to be found; not indeed in
affirming now a fragment of one view and now a fragment of the other,
but in showing how _absolutely universal is the extent_, and at the
same time how _completely subordinate is the significance, of the
mission which mechanism has to fulfil in the structure of the world_.”

There is also hidden from Nordau’s view that noble conception of the
place and significance of Science to which Tyndall gave expression in
the eloquent peroration of his Belfast address more than twenty years
ago:

“Science itself not unfrequently derives motive-power from an
ultra-scientific source. Some of its greatest discoveries have been
made under the stimulus of a non-scientific ideal.... The world
embraces not only a Newton, but a Shakspere—not only a Boyle, but a
Raphael—not only a Kant, but a Beethoven—not only a Darwin, but a
Carlyle. Not in each of these, but in all, is human nature whole.
They are not opposed, but supplementary—not mutually exclusive, but
reconcilable. And if, unsatisfied with them all, the human mind, with
the yearning of a pilgrim for his distant home, will still turn to
the Mystery from which it has emerged, seeking so to fashion it as to
give unity to thought and faith, so long as this is done, not only
without intolerance or bigotry of any kind, but with the enlightened
recognition that ultimate fixity of conception is here unattainable,
and that each succeeding age must be held free to fashion the
mystery in accordance with its own needs—then, casting aside all the
restrictions of Materialism, I would affirm this to be a field for the
noblest exercise of what, in contrast with the knowing faculties, may
be called the creative faculties of man.”

Why, then, should not literature and art and music enter and occupy
the very field that the apostles of Science assign to them, without
being exposed to the alienists’ sneers for their symbolism and their
mysticism? The truth is that Nordau is the slave of one idea, and that
the logical outcome of his definition and conception of abnormality.
Ribot described such a case perfectly when he said that “nothing is
more common or better known than the momentary appropriation of the
personality by some intense and fixed idea. As long as this idea
occupies consciousness, we may say without exaggeration that it
constitutes the individual.” Degeneration constitutes Nordau. He is
himself an abnormality and a pathological type. Every large hospital
for the insane knows his representative—the one sane man in a world of
lunatics.

To perceive the true direction and to estimate the relative force of
a large human movement requires a long interval of time. Caught in
an eddy of the moment, we may seem to be drifting backward, when in
reality to the spectator on the shore we are being swept onward with
great rapidity. The same world of experience seemed to Parmenides to
exclude by its very nature all motion, and to Heraclitus to derive its
only reality from its perpetual change. It is the standard and the
point of view that control such judgments, and we are entitled to ask
of any standard or point of view, _Quid juris?_ Nordau, however, has
not asked himself that question. Seizing upon some partially completed
anthropological investigations, with their half-speculative inferences,
he has fashioned for himself a yard-stick with which to measure
civilization. Aristotle long ago pointed out that the true difference
between the poet and the historian is to be found in the fact that the
former relates what may happen, the latter what has happened. One might
similarly distinguish the man of science, who applies what has been
proved, from the charlatan, who seeks to apply what has not been proved.

As a result of dissenting from Nordau’s premises, method, and
conclusions, it is by no means necessary to be forced to defend all the
phases of modern civilization that he attacks. Some of them, no doubt,
are unwholesome, but for reasons other than those which this critic
adduces. Many of them are mere fleeting phenomena, confined within
the narrowest limits, and the world at large first heard of them from
Nordau’s pages. It is only a lack of humour that can elevate such
traits and tendencies into the position of powerful forces in human
culture, such as Platonism, Humanism, or Christianity. The old Sophist
was right when he commended humour as the test of gravity.

The author of _Regeneration_ is successful in turning the flank of
Nordau’s attacking forces at more points than one. He is able at times,
without over-exertion, to convict Nordau not only of lack of knowledge,
but of what is far worse—knowledge of things that are not true. His
view of life is more sane and better-balanced than that of Nordau,
despite an anti-Teutonic tendency that perhaps partakes of the nature
of an argument _ad hominem_. The judgment of the average man who knows
the history of the past two centuries will sustain him in holding that
“there are a host of indications in all civilized countries pointing
to an increase in intellectual power, moral strength, and æsthetic
refinement.” Those to whom Lincoln applied the affectionate designation
of “the plain people” have advanced and are advancing by tremendous
strides in knowledge and refinement. They, and not a group or two of
men and women in each of the capitals of Europe, are the real index
to the degeneracy, or the contrary, of modern life. If democracy is
to establish itself more widely and more efficiently as a form of
government, it must rest upon the common sense of the plain people.
So far from being influenced by the tendencies that Nordau exploits
with so much vigour, it is not improbable that even the names of the
representatives of most of those tendencies are unknown to them.
Progress in education, in philanthropy, in commerce and industry, and
in the comforts of life, has developed a seriousness and a sense of
responsibility that have brought into many an English and American face
the lines that distinguished the countenance of the typical Senator
of Rome. The higher altruism of our time believes that life is not
only worth living, but worth working for. Long ago Mr. Herbert Spencer
remarked that the current conception of progress is vague, and that it
is in a great measure erroneous. It takes in, he said, not so much the
reality of progress as its accompaniments—not so much the substance
as the shadow. Nordau, with all of the superficiality, the absence of
any sense of proportion, and the lack of humour that so often mark the
extreme specialist, has hardly come in sight of even the shadow.

                                             NICHOLAS MURRAY BUTLER.

  Columbia College,
    _January, 1896._




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I                                       PAGE

  Who is the Critic?                                 1

  CHAPTER II

  Dusk or Dawn!                                     27

  CHAPTER III

  Mysticism and the Unknowable                      44

  CHAPTER IV

  The Bankruptcy of Science                         73

  CHAPTER V

  Symbolism and Logic                               94

  CHAPTER VI

  The Light of Russia                              108

  CHAPTER VII

  The Real Ibsen                                   132

  CHAPTER VIII

  Richard Wagner                                   183

  CHAPTER IX

  The Religion of Self                             230

  CHAPTER X

  An Ethical Inquisition                           241

  CHAPTER XI

  Vigorous Affirmations                            258

  CHAPTER XII

  Regeneration                                     290




REGENERATION




CHAPTER I

_WHO IS THE CRITIC?_


Voltaire said that if all the celestial bodies are inhabited, our earth
must be the mad-house of the universe. To us who know the era of the
great cynic only as recorded by the history of Dryasdusts, and the
flippant memoirs and autobiographies of his contemporaries, his biting
sarcasm cannot be considered undeserved. But, with regard to our own
times, most of us would probably hesitate to brand our present state of
culture, our modern civilization, as a fool’s paradise.

It is a truism that an historical epoch can only be correctly studied
at a distance in time, as the outlines of a mountain can only be
studied at a distance in space. The actor in a piece, though intimately
acquainted with his own part and the accessories with which he comes
in contact, cannot form a just idea of the impression which the play,
with its more or less successful rendering, its scenery, and other
spectacular effects, produces on the mind of the average spectator. A
super who is ignorant of stage management and of the precise results
the manager aims at might deem many things going on behind the stage
both foolish and ridiculous. To him the frantic efforts of some actor,
or scene-shifter, to produce some ordinary effect might well appear as
lunacy.

The judgment we form concerning the time we live in runs a great risk
of being biassed by the narrowness of the vista we can command. The
interdependence of causes simultaneously at work, the co-operation of
impulses active at a great distance, the peculiarities of circumstances
surrounding each leading phenomenon, the real intentions of leading
characters, secret motives in groups and parties—all this represents so
many sealed books to the contemporary to be gradually opened only by
future historians.

There are no doubt many facilities ready to hand for the man who in
modern times desires to study his own epoch, which were not available
in the past. Distances are practically suppressed, the whole of
civilized humanity has been placed in intimate connection, a highly
developed Press records daily events everywhere in a minute fashion,
to the making of books there is no end, and in every direction an
elaborate mechanism is established for the obtaining of rapid and
precise information. In fact, the _Kammergelehrte_, who, like Kant,
would study the world-phenomenon without leaving his native town, would
in our days stand a better chance of obtaining completer and exacter
information than any philosopher before him.

But, despite the quasi-ubiquitousness the modern philosopher enjoys, he
would indulge in self-deception were he tempted to believe that he had
secured all the data requisite to judge the contemporaries of his race
as they act, live, feel, and think during the closing years of this
century.

For, against the easy access to information, must be placed the mass
of intricate problems that arise with every step of progress, the
multitude of ideas which strive for realization, the bewilderment
which ensues on crumbling systems and religions, new discoveries,
new theories, new and complicated associations of ideas, new and
hazy aspirations, sympathies, and yearnings—for all of which words
cannot be coined fast enough. Every day we witness political, social,
economic, and psychological phenomena, the explanation of which would
demand not only an enormous amount of knowledge, but reasoning powers
and a freedom from bias seldom blended in one human mind. Facts,
circumstances, theories, human actions, and human ideas, change and
intermingle so constantly and so rapidly as to produce bewilderment
capable of misleading any philosopher who attempts to gauge them with
the instruments of the past and in conformity with the doctrines of the
school to which he belongs.

What renders it still more difficult to appraise any epoch, and
especially the present one, is the intimate interdependence of all
the phenomena to be observed. The idiosyncrasies of a sovereign, or
of a minister, influence legislation, legislation influences public
institutions, public institutions influence the upper classes, and the
upper classes influence the masses. But legislation, institutions,
the upper classes, and the people are influenced from a great number
of other directions, while they again influence the sovereign and
the minister. Thus it would be impossible to attribute with accuracy
a given number of effects to special causes: for every cause is the
effect of another cause, and every effect produces other effects.
For instance, art and literature may strongly influence men in power
as well as the masses, while no one will deny that men in power, as
well as the political and social condition of the masses, exercise
a strong influence on art and literature. And then, on top of it
all,—as if worse to confound the confusion of the man with a system,
trivial incidents intervene and bring about a new series of causes
and effects evidently destined to operate as long as humanity lasts.
So interdependent are the actors in the human drama, so complete is
the intricate and sensitive mechanism of causes and effects, and so
overcharged with energy are the social dynamos, that any fool, any
child, any trivial accident, may move one of the countless points
arranged by circumstances, and thus hurl the engine of events in new
and dangerous directions.

These and many other difficulties encountered by the student of his own
time are largely responsible for his opinions, often savouring as much
of his idiosyncrasy, his professional and national prejudices as of an
independent inquiry. In order to choose between the maze of highways
and by-ways, in order to judge whether he moved forwards, backwards,
or in a circle, he gropes for some kind of a compass and naturally
clutches at that which his idiosyncrasy proffers. When we therefore
meet with an appraiser of his own epoch, it behooves us to bear in mind
the standpoint from which he has contemplated the world-phenomenon,
and with what bias and prejudice his views have been coloured. The old
Greek story of the sandal-maker who became prejudiced against a work
of art because the artist had made a mistake in the arrangement of the
sandal-strings, points its moral. The prejudices arising from trade,
personal interests, and many other palpable sources are not difficult
to trace and to evade, but where is the man whose views have not been
influenced by his nationality, his religion, his favourite science or
art, his love, his hatred, or his ambition?

It is to such influences, often considered by the influenced as so many
advantages and seldom sufficiently noticed by his critics, that we
often owe the apparent profundity and exhaustiveness of an appreciation
which in reality is one-sided.

Education, and, still more, an intense study of one special branch
of knowledge, rich in important and striking results, naturally tend
to strengthen the student’s faith and his belief in the capabilities
of his favourite science. The brain-cells, influenced by the will,
and habitually becoming stimulated by presentations—emanating from
the subject on which the student has concentrated his attention—adapt
themselves gradually to the perception of such presentations, and by
re-acting on other cells render the whole organism disposed to seek
such presentations. In plain language, the specialist in one science
has a great aptitude for discovering such causes and such effects
as his favourite science has best elucidated, while he is tempted
to overlook other causes and other effects which may be of equal or
greater importance.

The specialist attains to a mastery of his own subject, and often
acquires a strong bias regarding other subjects, because he pursues his
inquiries somewhat after the same fashion as the dog follows the scent
of the game. By training, the dog is familiar with the smell of the
animal pursued, and, bent on following the trail, he pays no attention
to any other scents or smells that he encounters in his course. In
the same way the specialist rapidly perceives and minutely studies
any phenomena, however slight, with which his favourite science has
rendered him familiar, while he is apt to disregard phenomena demanding
fresh studies and threatening to be inexplicable by investigation
confined to the lines which he prefers to follow.

Thus, if a law-student were to write a treatise on our epoch, he would
endeavour to show that the jurisprudence, the law, and the courts—in
fact, the whole legal mechanism—is the most important feature in our
civilization, and that on which progress or retrogression most depends.
As remedies for our evils, he would propose simpler or more complicated
forms of procedure, more or less enactments, according to his own
idiosyncrasies.

A military man would consider a development on military lines as true
progress. He would yearn to draft the whole nation into the army! He
would favour universal conscription, as Lord Wolseley does, and might,
like Count Moltke, look upon war as a healthy bracing, an epuration, of
a race, and as an indispensable corrective to over-population. He would
cite the expansion of the chest in Germany as a proof of the power of
military training to further physical development, and would look upon
strict military discipline as the means of establishing moral order in
a country.

A theologian would point to the immense influence exercised by
Christianity upon humanity, and would insist upon the religious aspect
of every question, and, like Mr. Drummond, would see in every new
discovery a confirmation of his peculiar dogmas. His remedy would be
more ritualism, or more liberal doctrines, or more emotion in religion,
according to his High Church, Broad Church, or Low Church creed.

Philosophical religionists, like Mr. Benjamin Kidd and others who
pin their faith to the development of the altruistic feeling in
human beings, would endeavour to reconcile all phenomena under their
observation with their theory of social evolution.

If therefore we wish to form a correct judgment of our own time and
our own contemporaries, we must not allow ourselves to be guided
exclusively by a scientist of one specialty. We ought to be all the
more on our guard, as the great erudition and the profound study which
each modern specialist has brought to bear on his subject gives to his
theories a striking plausibility, a savour of exact science to such an
extent as to sway our opinions in favour of the latest treatise we have
read.

Politicians, sociologists, economists, biologists, theologians, and
the æsthetes have had their say and have each in their turn exercised
a periodical spell over the public mind. It is now the turn of the
alienists. Dr. Max Nordau has by his book entitled _Degeneration_
produced no small sensation throughout the world, and not least
in this country. Though his work may not have made the stir of a
sensational novel read by the millions, there can be little doubt
that it has imposed itself on every educated mind in the country. It
is no exaggeration to say that, like a sharp trumpet-blast, it has
awakened the educated classes from the lethargy consequent upon the
din of clashing opinions and contradictory systems. This volume has
once more roused us to the fact that we, as individuals, as a nation,
as a race, are travelling at comet-speed towards a goal of which we
have no inkling. It sternly suggests that we are on the wrong road and
that a fate of a most horrible description is rapidly befalling us—an
affliction in most people’s view worse than annihilation. Madness is
shown to be insidiously invading our minds, and by its contagious
nature threatening to prove Voltaire’s biting sarcasm a stern prophecy.

It is no wonder that his work has become as it were a nightmare
to millions of minds. If its diagnosis and its conclusions are as
irrefutable as to most people they appear to be, we indeed live in a
fool’s paradise: our leaders, our authorities, our men of genius,
are not the beacons we have held them to be, but will-o’-the-wisps
luring us into the bottomless quagmires of lunacy; the progression we
vaunted is a slippery plane sliding us back to bestiality; our means
for raising the masses are so many slashes at the bonds of moral
order and decency, calculated to unloose the brutish Loke of modern
democracy; unbridled animal appetites threaten to take the place of
law and religion; all social order is being undermined; and the vilest
instincts press for gratification in lust, rapine, and murder. With
all the solemnity, moral persuasiveness, and scientific authority of
a medical practitioner, Max Nordau tells us that a mortal disease is
invading our race, and that with the end of the century the “dusk” of
humanity begins.

Before we accept the views of Max Nordau, before we have recourse
to the drastic remedies he seems to recommend, it is right that we
should subject his theories to the closest investigation. If his work
were one of exact science, there would be no necessity to refer to
the personality of the author, to his peculiar point of view, and to
his predilections. But, as his work partakes largely of the nature
of special pleading, as his methods of reasoning are those of the
enthusiastic specialist, and as his postulates are strongly coloured
by racial, national, and professional bias, the more we know of him
the more easily shall we follow him in his progress on the highways of
logic and in his deviations from them. Human language is not so perfect
as to allow us to dispense with the additional light on expressed
ideas which may be derived from one’s knowledge of the speaker who
gives utterance to them. To study the author as well as his work is
all the more permissible, as this volume is not intended as a complete
refutation of Max Nordau’s conclusions, but rather aims at separating
the dross from the gold and at giving him, as well as his work, their
right place and their true value as telling factors in the development
of our race. Indeed, this is exactly the method adopted by Max Nordau
in his study, not to say dissection, of his contemporaries.

It must be clearly understood however that there is no intention of
going to the length to which Max Nordau has gone in speaking of men of
the day—an abuse of literature which recalls the literary squabbles
of past generations. The gross vituperation and the coarse calumny
he levels against those he denounces will certainly not enhance his
popularity or inspire confidence in his methods in England. In fact,
his frequent indulgence in personalities would have prejudiced his work
enormously were it not for the overwhelming testimony it offers of the
fact that its author’s mind is conspicuously devoid of the sense of
the ridiculous. Had it not been for this peculiar mental defect, his
treatment of his opponents could not have failed to remind him of the
disputing doctors in Molière’s _Malade Imaginaire_.

Here we have to do not with the man, but with the author,—not with his
relations to his private surroundings, but with his relation to the
presentations he receives, the ideas he elaborates, and the conclusions
he proclaims.

In _Degeneration_ Max Nordau evidently strives to take a cosmopolitan
standpoint. Only in three or four places does he speak of Germany as
his own country, while he displays a remarkable erudition in foreign
literature, but only a superficial knowledge of foreign circumstances.
Unconsciously however he constantly betrays his German nationality.
To say that he is a typical German involves by no means any slur upon
his views, has nothing to do with the fact that the Germans are at
this moment—for reasons entirely independent of German worth—rather
unpopular in this country. It is his book that clearly announces him
as a German, just as the books of Drummond and Benjamin Kidd announce
them to be English. In other words, his methods, his views, his
predispositions, his standards, his ideals, are thoroughly German.

Few countries have so strong a power of inspiring love for their
institutions and their characteristics as Germany. Not only is the
German spell over those who are born and bred in the country, but
foreigners who reside there any length of time generally become
thoroughly Germanized. Even English people, whose characteristic it is
to create a little England around them wherever they go, are remarkably
susceptible to German influence when living in the country.

Despite the propensity of many Germans, complained of by Max Nordau in
his book, to imitate French art and literature, the German people have
strongly pronounced characteristics, opinions, feelings, and views.
We, here in England, have ample opportunity of observing the tenacity
of the German bias. We sometimes meet with Germans who have conquered
their native propensities and thoroughly assimilated themselves with
the English nation. But, on the other hand, many Germans, when settled
among us, continue to look on everything through German spectacles,
and utterly fail to grasp, or even superficially to understand, the
English spirit. This refers, of course, only to those who are actually
born in Germany. The second generation is invariably more English
than the English. We often meet with Teutons who have come young to
England, gained a position here, married English wives, brought up a
large family of English children, and who yet remain as German as any
_Spiesbürger_ in Berlin. They do not appear so to the casual observer.
Their business relations, their acquaintances, their wives, and their
children, being all English, expect them to be English. They therefore
assume an English outward garb, but as soon as circumstances allow them
to drop their English character the German characteristics of these
“tame Englishmen” come out as strong as ever. These facts are elicited
in no critical spirit, but simply as proofs of the tenacity of the
German bias.

The practical result of this bias is an open or secret contempt for
English views, a distrust in English institutions, a want of sympathy
with the English race, and doubts about the future of the British
Empire.

If we wish Max Nordau’s nationality to throw light on the working of
his mind, we must realize what are the most essential traits of the
average German.

Not yet completely freed from feudal institutions, it is natural that
the German people should associate moral and political order, good
administration, and personal protection, with feudal institutions.
Hence an immense respect for those in authority and a contempt for
the masses, even on the part of the masses. Democratic government and
individual liberty inspire the German with great distrust, because he
considers that the introduction into Germany of such features would
mean a social upheaval in which the meagre advantages which now each
individual enjoys might be lost.

As in Germany all initiative belongs to the authorities, the people
have become accustomed to bend to superiors, and where an Englishman
would attempt to establish a Free Order, the Germans can conceive
nought but discipline. A great number of enlightened Germans submit
tacitly to all kinds of authorities because they are morally convinced
that this is best for themselves and their country; but a large part
of the masses, having always found that the authorities gain their
ends by the use of police and military force, submit only because they
are obliged. Hence a deep-rooted feeling of discontent in a nation
constantly compelled to do the bidding of others. This discontent has
engendered a hatred against the upper classes similar to that which in
France paved the way for the first Revolution. The fear of the outbreak
of this hatred gives, in the eyes of the German middle-class, an extra
halo to authority.

The love of following authorities, instead of standing alone, is in
Germany not confined to the domain of politics. While Englishmen, down
to the wage-earning labourer, have, or believe they have, their own
opinions about politics, administration, religion, social affairs, and
even scientific problems, the Germans have an accepted authority in
each of these branches. Were we to question, say, a hundred Germans
in a _Bierhalle_, or any other public place, as to their opinions on
the above-named subjects, the replies would be simply an enumeration
of their authorities in each branch of knowledge. Though this
characteristic is a misfortune to Germany, to the Germans it savours
of a quaint reasonableness. A German Socialist, asked why he blindly
accepted Liebknecht’s views, replied: “I should be both silly and
conceited if I, a scantily educated man, with no leisure and means for
study, could believe myself capable of forming a better opinion than
Herr Liebknecht, who has brought a remarkable mind and great knowledge
to bear on political questions.”

This reasoned self-depreciation, this blind faith in authorities,
accounts for much in Germany which would be impossible in England. The
way, for example, in which the youths of the country are forced into
the ranks of the army against their will and inclination would be out
of the question with us. Here, the great majority of young men would
simply refuse, and to coerce them by military executions would involve
a wholesale slaughter against which the whole nation would revolt.
There have been young men in Germany who, on principle, have resisted
the compulsory service, but brutal punishment has quickly dissuaded
those of their comrades who secretly admired them from following their
example. Nothing could be more unjust to the German people than to
attribute to cowardice this lamb-like submission. German youths are
as brave as those of any other nation, and what to us English might
appear a want of both moral and physical courage is simply the powerful
influence of the German bias.

Enough has been said to show that German education and German
surroundings tend to foster in the human mind veneration for authority
and aristocracy, contempt for the plebeian, distrust of liberty, a firm
belief in the unquenchable power of man’s lowest instincts, a nervous
demand for authoritative repression of human passions, contentment with
a prosaic existence, small resources, and poor prospects.

It is natural that a nation whose mind is moulded in such a form
should despair of the practical realization of its ideals; that the
aspirations of the German race for liberty, enjoyment, and romance
should seek an outlet in the realms of the imagination; and that the
Germans should be a sentimental race. In this they differ diametrically
from our nation. The young German, when his humdrum work-day is over,
will plunge into books of poetry, romance, and adventure. He will
worship and eagerly follow his pet heroes, but to emulate them in
practical life, as a rule, does not occur to him.

His romantic admiration of female beauty, and his sentiment of love,
have nothing to do with his marriage. He postpones, as a rule, the
taking to himself a wife until he is fairly successful in life, when
pure romantic love has ceased to exercise any spell over him, and
he expects that his marriage should improve his social position and
procure him a circle of desirable friends. His poetical notions of love
do not interfere with the choice of a wife. What he looks for is a
young woman with practical qualities, likely to be a useful _Hausfrau_,
and when he has found her, he loses no time in suppressing all her
poetical notions and soon reduces her to a submissive drudge.

No suspicion of inconsistency enters the mind of an average German
when he reads or writes romances of love and chivalry in which the
hero shows the most refined courtesy, commits deeds of self-abnegation
and daring in honour of his lady-love, and exercises the utmost tact
in shielding her from every harsh and unpleasant impression, and at
the same time treats his wife as one devoid of all claims upon his
consideration. He will exact from her such small menial services as the
slave performs for his master. He will expect her to work constantly
for him, the family, and the house. He will not allow her enough
time or money for her toilet, for pleasure, for book, and social
intercourse. He will not stir to save her trouble or fatigue. He will
come to the table in dressing-gown and slippers, and coolly look for
special dishes for himself, while his wife and children have to content
themselves with cheap garbage.

Germans of the middle-class who come to England frequently express
their amazement at the way in which English husbands constantly pay
attention to their wives. They call it undignified for the breadwinner
and master of the house, on return from a day of professional work, to
“dance attendance” on his wife, whose duty it is to serve her husband.

The German, prior to marriage, allows his poetical notions to be
disturbed as little by his sexual emotions as by his marriage plans.
In a methodical and business-like way he gratifies the former
in police-supervised establishments, and what he looks upon as
“constitutional sprees” are never allowed to interfere with the course
of his affairs. After a night of debauch he will turn up in his studio,
his office, or his home, smiling and happy as if nothing had happened.

We record these observations with no desire to criticise or to
underrate the German character. Nor do we wish to insinuate that
hypocrisy and profligacy are non-existent in England. We simply wish
to show that the development of the German race has induced them to
conceive ideals entirely unrealizable, and to dream of aims so far off
in time as to render them unattainable.

It will be evident to all who have read _Degeneration_ that Max Nordau
is under the influence of a strong German bias. As we proceed, we shall
have occasion to point out how in many instances this bias has warped
his perceptions, his reasoning, and his conclusions.

From characteristics revealed in his work, the observant reader will,
no doubt, conclude that Max Nordau belongs to the Jewish race. The view
he takes of the disgraceful Jew-baiting tendencies now prevailing in
Germany is based on exactly the same mistakes committed by the Jews
themselves, as we shall have an opportunity of verifying later on. He
is evidently a free-thinking Jew, a type which we meet with everywhere,
and against which as few objections can be raised as against any
other type of man. The free-thinking Jew is generally clever,
well-instructed, moral, and cheerful. His good qualities however
do not prevent him from having his peculiar characteristics, which
naturally influence his perceptions and his feelings. He has generally
a cut-and-dried life-philosophy based on science and common-sense as
well as on Jewish authorities. He distrusts democracy, especially
Christian democracy, and feels never quite safe except under laws and
institutions which allow him to assume such ascendancy as his mental
qualifications can secure for him, and those who think with him. He
does not seek for primary causes, and sets up no spiritual ideals.
Though he may not be religious, he has yet retained something of the
monotheist creed, the predilection for worldly affairs, and the habit
of looking forward to a future life rather in his descendants than in
a heaven—a view which always characterized his race. His philosophy is
nothing if not practical. His aims are immediate, and, as a rule, he
eagerly embraces all the teachings of the materialist scientists.

Max Nordau is a modern scientist. He is not a pioneer in science, but
a most persevering and plodding student of the works of others. He
belongs to that class of _savants_ who spend almost all their time and
all their energy in reading up the authorities. So vast an erudition
as he has acquired cannot be attained to without some sacrifice in
other directions. The constant absorption of other peoples’ opinions
and theories compels the judgment to lean more and more on authorities,
and this unfits it, to some extent, for independent action. It is the
indefatigable readers who most blindly follow authorities, and it
suffices to glance at Max Nordau’s dedication to Professor Lombroso
to understand to what an extent he is subject to the influence of
“Masters.”

The pride taken by a scientist in his science, and the great practical
results achieved by scientific investigations, naturally tend to
foster an implicit confidence in its tenets. This has been especially
the case during the last decades, so remarkable for religious
tolerance. As the faith in old dogmas has receded, science has
advanced, and in many cases taken its place. That such has been the
case has naturally flattered the votaries of science, and tempted them
to become prophets as well as investigators. They have come to look
upon systems as dogmas, speculations as absolute truths, and in this
fashion scientific superstition tends to take the place of religious
superstition.

The scientifically superstitious man is an example of the dangers
of a little knowledge. Not that our men of science, including the
superstitious scientists, are defective in such knowledge as is
attainable at our present stage, but the sum total of all human
knowledge is still, and is probably destined ever to be, only partial
and extremely superficial. Compared with the knowledge in the past,
modern science represents an immense progress, but as to throwing light
on the great secret of the Universe, far from having done anything of
the sort, it has, on the contrary, revealed more and more inexplicable
wonders, and placed us face to face with more insoluble problems.
Though trite, the aphorism that the more we learn the more we realize
our ignorance is truer to-day than ever. It is natural and excusable
that devotees of a science which to them has revealed wonderful
results should raise abnormal expectations with regard to its future
possibilities, and also that vanity, a weakness often co-existent with
vast knowledge, should prompt a scientist to extol and glorify science
far beyond the bounds of reason; for any worship offered to science
rebounds necessarily on its high priests. This impossibility to realize
the limits in which science moves, and the yearning for admiration, lie
at the base of scientific superstition.

The scientifically superstitious man believes that science has
adequately replied to those great questions which humanity has been
asking itself for the last five thousand years. How was creation
originated? For what purpose did it come into existence? What is man?
What does the scheme of humanity involve? Have we existed before our
birth? Shall we live after death? What is the origin of evil? What
is eternity? What is boundlessness in space? What is reason? What is
instinct? and so on.

If his excessive study has not seriously impaired his independent
reasoning powers, the superstitious scientist may confess that these
questions have not been replied to by science, but there will still
lurk in his mind the belief that one day science will answer them.

He does not distinguish between nomenclature, registration, and
classification on the one hand, and explanation on the other. When he
has named any newly-discovered substance, force, or phenomenon, he
imagines that he has explained them. He believes that he has accounted
for what is called matter when he has evolved the atom, and that he has
unveiled the secret of life when he has discovered the protoplasm or
the cell.

All scientists are not affected by scientific superstition. They
generally suffer from it in an inverse ratio to the actual knowledge
they have acquired. The pioneer in science generally exhibits less of
this weakness than those who simply act as commentators and elaborators
of other men’s discoveries.

The votaries of certain sciences are less apt to indulge in scientific
superstition than those of other branches. Thus, astronomers rarely
exhibit any such symptoms, while biologists are more apt to do so, and
psychologists are more scientifically superstitious than any other
class of scientists. It might be hazardous to attempt an explanation
of this fact, but may it not be found in the obviousness of outward
infinity, and the impalpability of inward infinity?

Later on we shall have ample occasion to show to what an extent Max
Nordau’s mind has been clouded by scientific superstition.

Finally, it must be pointed out that Max Nordau is an enemy to France.
It is only human in any German. The stupendous armament of France
is ostentatiously promoted with the object of revenge upon Germany.
France, in her sulks over the lost provinces, takes every opportunity
of showing animosity, and this despite the conciliatory attitude of her
Government.

Though nearly a quarter of a century has elapsed since the disastrous
war between Germany and France, the bad feeling between the two
nations has unfortunately been kept up. France cannot forget the loss
of her provinces, and, though the attitude of the French Government
is conciliatory, outbursts of a feeling of hatred against Germany,
accompanied by provocative language on the part of irresponsible men,
constantly occur.

The German people, with a vivid recollection of the French invasion
early in the century, and perhaps taking the expressions of the
war-party in France too seriously, look upon the French nation as
their arch-enemies. By the celebration of anniversaries painful to the
French, and other means, the German Government keeps the animosity
between the two nations alive, and impresses the people with the
opinion that the heavy taxes it has to pay for armaments are made
indispensable by the enmity of France. It, is therefore, natural that
hatred against France should prevail in Germany.

We understand that Max Nordau for a considerable time was the Paris
correspondent of German papers, and we may take for granted that he
would not have been able to please his German readers had he not been
strongly biassed in favour of Germany against France—a fact to which
his work bears ample witness.

Such is, then, the man who, in his undaunted faith in his science and
in himself, in the name of truth and the welfare of humanity, and
undeterred by the penalties of the Great Council and Hell Fire, has
said to his brethren,—to the one, “You are Raca!” and to the other,
“Thou fool!”




CHAPTER II

_DUSK OR DAWN!_


Nordau’s theory is that the educated classes of the world are
degenerating; that the peculiarities in passions, tastes, pastimes, and
moods, bear witness to such degeneration; that the cause must be found
in the physical condition of the brains of such authors and artists as
for the time being have the ear and the eye of the public; that the
remedy against degeneration may be found in a moral quasi-compulsory
supervision on the part of the non-degenerate over degenerate authors
and artists. If we are not entirely exact in this summary of his
postulates and conclusions, it is to a great extent Nordau’s fault,
because nowhere does he give any decided statement of the scope of his
book.

In his first chapter he goes out of his way in order to protest against
the misconception which represents him as having insinuated that the
whole of humanity exhibited signs of decay, and he declares that his
remarks apply exclusively to the educated classes. Were this absolutely
true, there would have been but small occasion for his remarkable
work. But over and over again in the pages of _Degeneration_ he speaks
of the masses as partly affected by degeneration, and of the danger of
the contamination spreading from the educated classes to the masses. He
mentions the extreme Socialists and the Anarchists as the victims of
the mental disease he investigates. And yet he flatters himself that
the proletariat is not as the upper classes are, and bases his opinion
on the fact that they appear satisfied with the old forms of art and
poetry, that they prefer George Ohnet’s novels to the works of the
symbolists, and Mascagni’s music to that of Wagner.

These statements evidently emanate from one who has mingled little with
the people. The truth is that the newest books, the newest music, the
newest pictures, only slowly reach the working classes, and when such
works are the outcome of temporary fashion and mood, they might not
reach them at all. But this by no means proves that the working classes
do not experience the impulses which prompt the predilections of the
upper classes.

If Nordau’s views of the proletariat in general were confirmed by
actualities prevailing among the German proletariat, a heavy load would
be lifted from the shoulders of the German Government. But, judging
from the German Press—the official Press as well as the Socialistic—or
from the speeches of so high an authority as the Emperor himself,
there exists but little of the Philistine contentment with the present
order of things of which the author speaks. On the contrary, the
Emperor complains that the discontented working classes are losing
their respect for things that used to be sacred to them, such as
patriotism, feudal loyalty, religion, etc.

Does Nordau mean to tell us that the pornographic novels of certain
French authors, that the works of Émile Zola and other realists, are
not read by the masses in France? Who then pays for the enormous
editions issued after millions have read them in _feuilleton_? Or does
he wish us to believe that only the aristocracy and the upper classes
in France have been affected by the mysticism which finds its outlet in
the pilgrimage to Lourdes?

As to the working classes in the English-speaking countries, which, by
the way, signify so little to Nordau that he not even once mentions
them in his work, are they not children of their time, and do they
not reflect every tendency, every virtue, and every vice in the
upper classes? Not only would Nordau find, were he to investigate
the matter, that those stigmata of degeneration which he refers to
as such—Individualism and Anarchism—are making big strides among the
English-speaking working classes, but that the taste for criminal and
realistic literature is growing in popularity. He would even find
Wagner’s music intensely applauded by audiences recruited from the
working class.

Far from developing ethically in different directions, the upper and
the lower classes in this country move together, each simultaneously
influencing the other. While the lower classes follow the upper classes
in many things—for example, politics, dress, etc.—the upper classes
obtain their comic songs, their humorous stories, and most of their fun
from the lower classes.

The impartial observer cannot fail to notice the kinship which exists
between the proclivities of the two extremes of English society—the
wealthiest nobility and the poorest labourers. Both these classes are
intensely fond of sports, both degrade sport by betting, both are given
to lavish expenditure, both pride themselves on physical force and
pluck above everything. Both are prone to disregard the sanctity of
marriage. Both indulge freely in the pleasures of eating and drinking.
Individuals of both classes get on together better than they do with
the middle classes. And both are only superficially religious.

Perhaps this remarkable community of tastes and views may account
for what has always been an inexplicable enigma to foreigners,—the
conservative working man.

Nordau classes, among the indications of decay, the yearning for
freedom from outward control and for complete personal independence. It
is true he takes for granted that such yearnings for individual liberty
aim at the realization of bestial propensities now, according to him,
kept in check only by law, police, and public opinion. We shall, later
on, find that he has completely misunderstood the attempts to shake
off all shackles which he has noticed. Here it suffices to point out
that the longing for individual freedom, which manifests itself in a
thousand ways unobserved by Nordau, and in the upper classes takes
the shape of a revolt against conventionality, is conspicuous among
the working classes of Great Britain. This year’s elections have
proved beyond doubt that the tendency towards State Socialism which
characterized the Liberal policy is fast becoming distasteful to the
rank and file of voters. The tyranny, which, in the name of Socialism,
was exercised by the Trades Unions, will soon be a thing of the past.
When at its height of development the Trades Unions hardly comprised
one-fifth of the working classes, and now already the movement is in
full retrogression. The Free Labour Association, though only lately
called into existence, meets with increasing support, and may no doubt
be looked upon as an expression of our working classes’ new-born love
of freedom.

This change of mind, or, as Nordau would call it, this degeneration,
also accounts for the present halt in the advance of the Socialistic
propaganda and the rapid spread of moderate but decisive Anarchist
opinions which in no small degree contributed to the recent
Conservative victory at the polls.

What is here stated regarding the British working classes is true
regarding the working classes of all the English-speaking countries.
Everywhere we find a strong yearning for freedom from control. The
remarkable point about the expressions of this yearning is that, though
the votaries of the revolt against State tyranny have so far not been
able to formulate any complete or practical scheme for the life of
a State, or community, governed by the best instincts of the human
being instead of by law, their views are rapidly gaining ground. This
is especially the case in the United States, where Mr. Tucker, the
editor of a little journal called _Liberty_, is steadily extending his
influence.

The author of _Degeneration_ distorts reality when he supposes that
the upper classes of a country can be corrupt and degenerate, while
the masses conform to that German Philistine ideal—a very poor one
indeed—which Nordau would fain hold up to them. This is proved by the
fact that it is in their relations with the masses that the corruption
of the upper classes becomes conspicuous, and that only through
response from the masses can many forms of such corruptions become
possible.

It would take us too far to record all the proofs that actualities
furnish of this fact. We shall simply point out one of the many
conditions in the masses which promote corruption in the educated
classes, namely, poverty. The appalling, demoralizing, brutalising
poverty in the large modern cities—this poisonous fungus grown out of
modern government and political corruptions, not only kills the sense
of self-respect and decency in its victims, but renders prostitution,
through sheer hunger and suffering, the trade of millions. It is
poverty among the masses which undermines the artistic feeling of the
nation, stands in the way of applied art, and compels the caterer of
popular amusements to appeal to low passions and brutal instincts. Our
epoch is not the first example in history where masses of destitute
people exercise all their ingenuity in corrupting the wealthy citizens
in the hope of snatching some crumbs of their wealth.

Dire poverty it is, with its hovels, its rags, and its diseases, which
gives riches their immense value in the eyes of the people. It creates
a thirst for gold. No man thinks himself safe from falling into the
abyss of modern poverty until he has amassed a large fortune and placed
himself in the position of amassing more. The love of wealth corrupts
Literature, Art, the Press. It is at the base of all financial,
political, administrative scandals. It is responsible for mercenary
marriages, which fill the law courts, pollute society, and contaminate
the home.

The poverty of the masses paralyses the efforts of honest industries,
honest trades, and honest professions. The men who succeed are not
those who benefit their fellow-men, but those who ruthlessly trample
them under foot in their heedless race for gold. It is a well-known
fact that the upper classes are not prolific, and would die out were
they not recruited from the ranks; if therefore the state of the masses
is such as to allow its worst element to rise to influential positions
in society, demoralization of the masses must inevitably produce
demoralization of the classes.

We will leave it to the thinking public to consider to what extent
other conditions of the masses, besides poverty, react in all countries
on the upper classes—what the effects are, first on the masses, and
then on the classes, of corrupt and retrograde churches, compulsory
service in the army, police tyranny, bad and unjust laws, tutelage
under pragmatical Philistines, caste institutions, official newspapers,
State-regulated arts and entertainments, administrative favouritism,
etc.

But Nordau takes no heed of such all-powerful causes of corruption.
He sees degeneration only in the upper classes, and, placing the cart
before the horse, he regards what he considers the degenerated author
and artist as the cause of a state of affairs of which they are the
very last products.

There are many passages in his book that strongly suggest that he is
not completely sincere in his one-sided view. The savage blows he
sometimes deals at the Anarchists bear witness that this form of—as he
would call it—degeneration among the masses caused him a considerable
amount of uneasiness. Judging by the similarity of his language and
that of the Emperor of Germany, he might well be commissioned to brand
both Socialists and Anarchists as wild beasts. Be this as it may, his
few allusions to the corruption of the masses serve to enhance the
untrustworthiness of the signs of degeneration which he points out in
the upper classes.

Among these figure prominently—who would believe it?—modern female
toilets. And why? Not because they are indecent, as they have often
been in other periods, but because they are eccentric. Is there then a
normal dress for ladies? Or what code is there in existence to which
Nordau can appeal? Is it a sign of degeneration to hold that one of the
chief objects of toilets is to be beautiful and to enhance the beauty
of the wearer? And ought a lady who dresses according to this principle
to be put down as a dweller on the border-land of madness? If women
love to dress well, and men love to behold them well-dressed, would it
not be madness to adopt ugly and monotonous toilets?

It is, of course, not difficult to see that the author’s standard of
female toilet is the plain and ugly dress of the German housewife, and
that he has never realized the delight which an Englishman takes in
seeing his wife richly dressed, and in a way that suits her face and
form. If Nordau’s standard of female dress is the severe draperies of
the antique, he does not say so. But, if it be, we must remind him that
the beauty of the classic draperies was borrowed from the beauty of the
forms they revealed or partly displayed.

With the best will, we could not in northern Europe emulate the
Greeks in dress. There are two objections: the climate, which
demands warm covering; the sense of may-be false modesty, inherited
from the early Christian ages, which prevents the display of human
forms. The time will no doubt come when humanity is sufficiently
pure-minded—sufficiently degenerated, as Nordau would probably say—to
dress in clinging draperies, to expose the form more freely indoors
and in warm weather; and who would say that morality would not be
the gainer? A movement in this direction is already apparent. The
skirt-dance represents one stage. The appearance of an actress without
shoes or stockings might well herald a return to sandals, and the
abandonment of the barbarous fashion of cramping children’s feet in
pointed shoes.

But to call the women of European society degenerate because, under the
present circumstances, they do not go about in light tunics, displaying
their feet, their arms, and one leg, is hardly fair.

Our great alienist is very severe on the men of society as well, more
especially for the manner in which they trim their beards. We cannot
help sympathizing with men who wear a double-pointed beard when they
are told that they are on the high road to lunacy because they ape
Lucius Verrius, a gentleman whose portrait they have probably never
seen. Such stigmata of folly could have been pointed out only by a man
whose mind is completely devoid of a sense of the ridiculous.

To anybody who has not a special point to prove at all cost, it will be
patent that throughout the whole course of history educated men never
dressed more soberly than now. In this matter English fashion governs
the world, and the ruling ideas in Englishmen’s dress are durability,
comfort, and adaptability to the occasions on which it is worn.
Continental men may not adhere so strictly to these ideas, but there is
good reason to believe that in a short time they will do so.

Modern room and house decorations are, according to Nordau, so many
indications of degeneration and decay. That there are many rooms
and houses eccentrically furnished and decorated throughout the
civilized world no one would deny. But compared with the number of
houses and rooms chastely furnished and decorated in a manner which
is incomparably more pleasant and attractive than the average rooms,
especially in Germany and England thirty years ago, these abodes of
eccentrics sink into insignificance. As to the decoration of public
halls and places of amusement, we surely notice an improvement which
could not point to degeneration. Hardly in any European town would such
wall decorations be now permitted as disfigured the walls of public
places of amusement and dancing-halls in Germany some thirty years
ago—the Apollo Saal of Hamburg, to wit, the walls of which represented
hell in the worst taste possible.

Here, again, Nordau gives us no standard to go by. He does not tell
us what the house or the room of a rational being should be like, or
to what extent a wealthy man may indulge in a freak, or amuse his
friends by grotesque furniture and bizarre decorations, without being
degenerated.

The enjoyments of society especially present symptoms which cause our
psychologist to tremble for the sanity of the upper classes. Under this
head, we expected him to say something of the increasing taste for
healthy games and sport, for travel, and the amateur practice of the
arts for amusement’s sake. Had he been willing to look at the question
from both sides, he might have said something about the increasing love
of science, especially social science; of good books as well as bad
ones; of the high prices fetched by the paintings of the old masters,
even those not belonging to the pre-Raphaelite period, consequently
real works of art according to Nordau. He might have acknowledged
the improved tone in social gatherings and the marked diminution in
convivial drunkenness.

While sitting in judgment upon the upper classes of Europe, why
should he not have noticed the more serious side of their lives as
well as their enjoyments, as manifested in subscriptions to hospitals
or orphanages, and institutes of every description; sick-nursing
establishments, where ladies of high rank and wealth give their
personal services, sacrifices of time and comfort in the endeavour
to brighten the lives of the poor, to save fallen women, to assist
released prisoners, to protect children and even animals from cruelty?
We say, purposely, nothing of all the charitable work done in
connection with churches, because Nordau and his admirers might not
recognise any results of religious feeling as a proof of sanity.

But all these emphatic and unmistakable indications of the state of
society—at least as valuable as the manifestations of vice, hysteria,
and eccentricity—are ignored. On the other hand, he makes much of the
attempts which here and there have been made, especially in Paris,
with representations appealing to many senses at once; for instance,
pictures exhibited with music, musical recitals in darkened rooms,
etc. Such cases are not only extremely rare, but simply are another
combination of many arts hardly more complicated than that represented
by operas, in which dance[,] music, poetry, and painting are mingled in
order to please.

In what recorded period, and in what nation, have there not been
attempts to create new sources of enjoyment? Why should not attempts
be made at advance in amusements as well as in any other feature of
our civilization? That many of these experiments appear silly, and
end in utter failure, ought to surprise nobody, and scientists the
least. Any one who has tried to invent something new, to ascertain by
experiments some scientific fact, or to solve a physical or mechanical
problem, ought to know that a very large number of experiments are
bound to fail before success is achieved. It is strange to find in
our days a scientist condemning, as the beginning of folly, that
dissatisfaction with existing things which is the primary motor of all
progress and all knowledge. By doing so he ranges himself on the side
of those Philistines who burnt the apostles of progress as heretics and
imprisoned the pioneers of science as madmen.

The unrest which our psychologist notices in the educated classes
exists as well among all the lower classes of Europe, though among them
it reveals itself in other manifestations. It springs however from
the same source—a strong instinctive feeling, largely corroborated by
judgment, that human life in all spheres is, in the present epoch,
utterly out of harmony with nature, with our irresistible instincts,
and all those noble aspirations, on the realization of which our
self-respect, our ease of mind, and our happiness alone can be based.
It is not alone the present feeling of incongruity which disturbs
humanity, but the fast-ripening conviction that we are moving in a
wrong direction inspires despair, pessimism in some, and a desire for
hazardous new departures in others.

This sense of unrest, this craving for change, far from being symptoms
of degeneration, are the first faint indications of renewing vitality.
If decay there be, it is simply the fermentation which precedes
germination.

Two opposing principles, two different systems, two classes of
antagonistic institutions, cannot exist in the same place and at the
same time. When therefore old things have been tried _ad nauseam_ and
constantly found wanting, any unprejudiced man, nay, even an animal,
must experience a desire to destroy them. This feeling naturally
becomes strongest in the man with an imaginative and aspiring mind:
for besides the general disgust of old things, he sees in them the
chief obstacles to better and higher things. The axe must precede the
plough, because the forest cannot co-exist with the wheat-field. The
growing enmity against old dogmas, old authorities, old forms among
the educated and artistic classes, the kindling rage of the masses
against existing institutions, signal the clearing of the rank jungle
and the pestilential swamps prior to cultivation. The leading features
of modern culture have up till now been submission to authorities,
violation of nature, sacrifice of individual liberty, and progression
on Collectivist lines. What wonder then that those who keenly feel the
present degradation of man, achieved under old conditions, should turn,
against these and clamour for liberty, nature, and self?

Nordau, with his German-Philistine ideas, with his head crammed
full of authoritative teaching, and biassed by the clap-trap of the
commonest Collectivism, has utterly misunderstood the phenomena which
he has only partially observed. He does not allow for the mistakes,
the exaggerations, and the eccentricities committed by men who try to
give expression to their feelings, their yearnings, their aspirations,
unhampered by traditional bonds. He is bewildered because a movement
springing entirely from feeling and instinct does not follow a fixed
programme, or some dry philosophical system. He under-estimates the
value of an ethical revolution, because so far it has not reached
its constructive stage; and because the new apostles of liberty,
intoxicated by their self-liberation, run amuck indiscriminately
against all old things, be they good or bad; because the movement is in
the hands of extremists, enthusiasts, and sentimentalists, and still
awaits the guiding hand of the unbiassed logician, the cool-headed
sociologist and economist, capable of harmonizing it with practical
life and moral order.

Nordau, by his book, has forfeited his claim to be one of these.




CHAPTER III

_MYSTICISM AND THE UNKNOWABLE_


Of the good things contained in Nordau’s book which should secure for
it a place in the study of every educated man, his fourth chapter
entitled “Etiology” figures conspicuously. He deals here with the
causes—not the primary economic and sociological causes, but the
immediate causes—of the increasing bodily debilities and mental
derangements characteristic of our epoch. Such facts, or generally
assumed facts, as that the average term of human life is extending;
that the average stature of man has increased since the middle ages,
rendering the armour of mighty men of those days too small for
middle-sized men of our generation; that the average chest-measure
in the German army is expanding; that personal beauty of children,
women, and men is in the ascendant; that many men attain to a great
age without the slightest sign of diminished mental power;—all these
facts might appear so many contradictions to Nordau’s assertions in the
chapter alluded to.

But, though the consideration of them might induce him to modify
some of the minor points, they are not completely inconsistent with
his general reasoning. He warns us that the excessive consumption of
spirits and tobacco, the use of opiates and poisons in general, produce
debility and premature death. Bad food, bad air, bad dwellings, and a
great number of other disadvantages which town dwellers, especially
the poor, must endure, are no doubt at least as harmful to body and
mind as he proves. He rightly attributes a great number of nerve
diseases to the prostration and fatigue consequent upon over-exertion
and over-excitement, which seems inevitable in an epoch of railways,
telegraphs, and machinery.

The whole of his chapter “Etiology,” however, dealing as it does with
the degeneration of the masses, seems to contradict what he says in
his first chapter about the upper classes only being affected by _fin
de siècle_ degeneration, while the masses experience only a more or
less slight touch of it. It also seems to disprove his theory that
degenerate authors and artists are the chief cause of degeneration
among the upper classes, a view which leads him to overlook the
most palpable and most powerful causes for the production of those
psychological phenomena throughout civilized humanity which he notices
only among the upper classes.

In discussing degeneration it is of the utmost importance to know how
the affliction progresses—whether certain authors and artists were
degenerated, and then affected the upper classes—or whether the upper
classes were degenerated and thus produced the degenerated authors
and artists. Nordau seems to vacillate between the two opinions, or
he considers the pernicious influence to have been reciprocal. It
is however clear that he regards these authors and artists, as well
as those members of the upper classes who sympathize with them, as
dwellers on the border-land between sanity and madness. The stigmata,
or the signs of distorted minds, he divides—as they necessarily must be
divided—into bodily stigmata and mental stigmata. The bodily stigmata
are of course malformations of the head, and he lays particular stress
on the conformation of the ear, its more or less projecting position,
the shape of the lobe, or its clinging to the head. It would have
been charity and justice on his part to have explained that, while
these stigmata are frequently found on lunatics and idiots, there are
probably millions of people who bear them without being demented, or
even eccentric.

On the other hand, it cannot be denied that there are thousands of
lunatics who possess well-shaped heads and ears.

He relies however but little on the bodily stigmata, and finds them
only on a few of his subjects. He deals, of course, chiefly with the
mental stigmata, and among these he gives mysticism a prominent place.
He quotes from Legrain to the effect that “mystical thoughts are to
be laid to the account of insanity and degeneration,” but Legrain
adds at once that they are observable in two states—in epilepsy and
in hysterical delirium. According to his authority we consequently
know that those who suffer from epilepsy and delirium are apt to be
mystical. But Legrain would probably be the first to object to the
conclusion that all those who are mystically inclined suffer from
epilepsy and delirium.

In his definition of mysticism Nordau says that “the word describes a
state of mind in which the subject imagines that he sees or divines
unknown and inexplicable relations amongst phenomena, discerns in
things hints at mysteries, and regards them as symbols.” But he adds,
“by which dark powers seek to unveil, or, at least, to indicate all
sorts of marvels which he endeavours to guess, though generally in
vain.”

We have divided his definition into two parts, because placed in one
sentence it seems an incorrect and unfair definition, the former part
of which might be used as a proof of degeneration in a perfectly sound
mind, while the latter part is the essential of the whole definition.

As we have already pointed out, science and all researches have utterly
failed to furnish replies to all questions regarding the origin,
aim, plan, and final destiny of the universe and of humanity. Under
such circumstances, the world around us, that which has preceded
it, that which will follow it, as well as ourselves, necessarily
remain mysteries. Can then any one who perceives or divines unknown,
and to us now inexplicable, relations between phenomena and who
discerns mysteries be regarded as a degenerate? All the scientific
facts of which we are now in possession were mysteries before they
were discovered, and the scientists who, guided by slight hints and
sometimes by guesses, have unravelled the marvels of nature, could not
surely be put down as lunatics. It is therefore evident that the phrase
“dark power” is a most essential part in Nordau’s definition, and
that a man can behold mysteries, dwell on them, study them, sometimes
unravel them, and remain a perfectly sane man, and that he only who is
mystical and deals with mysteries in an irrational way is a degenerate.

Nordau says as much in his illustration of the peasant who is a
mystic in his religion and in his belief in the weather-witch, but a
matter-of-fact man in his farming and in his business. But he is not so
lenient to the exponents of the mystic school in art and literature.
With regard to these, he is rather prone to determine the state of
their mind according to that part of a quotation from Morel which he
has italicised in his book, “_a morbid deviation from an original
type_.” The word morbid alone would have sufficed, but he seems to
attach more importance to the other part of the sentence and to regard
all who deviate from an original type as degenerate. He does not allow
for extenuating circumstances in the authors and artists as he does in
the case of the peasant. If he did, he could not class any of these, or
their admirers, among the degenerates, unless he could also prove that
they were irrational in their daily life and their business relations.

He acknowledges that the emotional nature of man has played a more
important part in the world than his intellect, and yet he seems
to have before his eyes an original type consisting exclusively
of intellect and devoid of emotions. If man’s destiny, his moral
condition, his education, his happiness, and his usefulness in the
world, were to be determined chiefly by his intellectual power, the
progress of the race would have been infinitely more slow than it has
been, and the bulk of individuals now alive would be far less removed
from the animal than they are.

It might be contended that, if not all, at least a large number of
religions have brought with them many evils, but, taking a broad view
of the work accomplished by them in comparison, not with what they
would have done had they been more perfect, but with that state which
would have prevailed had they never existed, no unprejudiced historian
will deny that civilization and the progress of our race have been
considerably accelerated through the influence of religions.

No religion is based on logic, and hardly ever were religious precepts
and dogmas accepted exclusively on intellectual grounds. Faith and
reasoning, considerably modified by emotion, have always formed the
basis of religious beliefs.

Not only in connection with religious matters, but in every event and
every development in human affairs, emotion has played an active and
prominent part. Such feelings as love, friendship, ambition, lust,
gratitude, hatred, revengefulness, patriotism, loyalty, chivalry, etc.,
are the great motive powers in the human drama, and when the intellect
steps in it is as their counsellor and their servant.

It is therefore legitimate and reasonable for those who wish to sway
human beings, who wish to educate them, elevate them, to address
themselves to their emotional nature. In the position in which man
is placed—living on a cosmic grain of sand, moving in space by an
inexplicable power at an inconceivable speed, without knowing who he is
and why he is—the mystical must perforce have a great attraction for
him. To be easily impressed by the mystical is therefore one of his
natural conditions, be it good, bad, or indifferent. When the emotional
nature of human beings is appealed to it is as rational for artists and
poets to address themselves to the love of the mystical as to the love
of the beautiful, and therefore there should be a legitimate place for
mysticism in art and poetry.

It is almost inconceivable that an educated, well-balanced mind
should never dwell on those immensities still unexplored, and the
innumerable enigmas still unsolved or insoluble, and content itself
with lingering over those comparatively insignificant truths which
science so far has revealed. To what an extent a man remains satisfied
with quasi-explanations of scientific research depends on the strength
of his imagination. It is pardonable if alienists should look upon
imagination as a doubtful blessing; but though it may appear a
dangerous gift in their patients, there can be little doubt that it is
an indispensable attribute to a well-equipped mind. It is the mental
faculty which most distinguishes man from the animals—the one on which
he could with the greatest appearance of legitimacy base his claim to
divine origin. Dogs may dream and horses may see ghosts, but their
hallucinations are vastly different from the imagination of man, which
allows him to receive and retain almost any number of presentations,
to elaborate them into new combinations, thus reconstructing pictures
of the past and daring conceptions of the future, capable of easy
realization. A powerful imagination is essential not only to the
poet and the artist, but to the engineer, the mechanician, the
statesman,—in fact, to all who set themselves a practical task or a
distinct ideal.

It is the imaginative strength of the scientist which renders him
a pioneer and a discoverer, and without it he is to his science
what the performer of music who cannot compose is to music. From
everyday experience we are justified in believing that the cramming
of the memory, much reading for examinations or other purposes,
and a developed habit of relying on authorities tend to weaken the
imagination in a man. This seems to be confirmed by the theory of
psychologists: that desuetude of a faculty tends to its decay; and
might well be the explanation of the often-confirmed fact that great
discoverers and inventors have seldom emerged from the ranks of the
omnivorous readers of the universities.

In the same manner we may explain what we have before called the
scientific superstition discernible in so many scientists. The more
they are satisfied with their systems, the more they take nomenclature
and classification for adequate explanation, the less they are
attracted by the spheres into which science has not penetrated or
cannot penetrate. There is this similarity between the scientifically
superstitious and the theologically superstitious—that they both
believe that they have explained all, and they thereby place themselves
beyond the possibility of being right; for the mass of unexpected
facts revealed by science, eclipsing as they do the wildest flight of
the imagination, renders it possible for any man to be right in his
speculations on the secrets of the universe save those men who say that
they know all.

It is therefore not surprising that a scientist by erudition, and
especially an alienist, who, by dint of studying the mechanism which
connects what some call the soul, and others designate as the trinity
of the consciousness, the judgment, and the will, with the body, has
persuaded himself that there is nothing beyond nerves, cells and the
gray matter, should look with contempt on imagination, and yet more
so on the love of the mystical, and that his ideal man, his “original
type,” should possess so little imagination as to remain unaffected by
the mystical.

Lack of information and of observation has caused the multitude to
regard a great number of men—distinguished in the eyes of the world
exclusively by their intellectual powers—as non-mystics to such a
degree as to class them as atheists. The majority of such men, though
distinctly at variance with the dogmas and views of established sects,
have been and are, in their inner consciousness, both mystics and
religionists. When in public they have seemingly attacked religion
and mysticism, they have in reality only attacked churches and
superstition. In the judgment of a great many intelligent men the
controversy between Professor Huxley and Dr. Martineau goes far to
confirm this view. When humanity, including scientists, learns to
distinguish between religion and churches, it will be understood that
almost all men in the past and present who have deservedly been called
great, have been religionists, and therefore mystics.

Let us instance Faraday. He belonged all his life to a sect which must
be classed among the mystics, and he died a believer in its creed.
Are we then to class this keen observer, accurate investigator, and
brilliant logician, this daring pioneer of science, this ingenious
unraveller of nature’s secrets, among the degenerates? If we do, where
should we class average scientists, including Nordau? Or should we
place ourselves in the position of the common-sense German Philistine,
and declare that mysticism is not mysticism when it takes the shape of
the belief of a sect tolerated by the police?

But is not Faraday’s mysticism perfectly compatible with a sound mind?
He was one of those scientists with unclouded reasoning powers, whose
knowledge—gained by investigation, not from authorities—had taught him
how little he knew of the great mysteries of creation. He recognised
that our emotional cravings cannot be satisfied by science in its
present stage, but only by emotional realization. Hence his religious
attitude towards the great mysterious power of which he knew nothing,
but whose work became more and more manifest as his investigation
proceeded. What wiser course could a man adopt, who was so capable
of distinguishing essence from form, than to give that form to his
religion which had gratified his emotional nature as a child?

If sound minds may be mystically inclined, if our emotional nature can
be reached by mysticism in poetry and art, and if our emotions are
acknowledged to be receptive to elevating and pleasing impressions,
the pre-Raphaelites could not all have been as degenerate as Nordau
would have us believe. They were, no doubt, emotionalists, mystics,
and even symbolists, and they frankly claimed the right to be regarded
as such. They considered themselves as having a mission, and the fact
that a man throws himself heart and soul into his mission is no sign of
degeneration.

Now, there are walks in life, callings, missions, which involve no risk
to those who undertake them; there are others that involve great risks.

Some callings expose a man to bodily harm, others to mental harm.
Nothing could be more uncharitable and cruel than to revile a man,
to attack his reputation, to wound his feelings, and to lower his
self-esteem, because he returns maimed and invalided after having
fought the good fight.

A shopkeeper, a shoemaker, an author of sensational books, runs but
little risk of damaging either his body or his mind. The sailor, the
miner, the leader of a revolution, exposes himself to great bodily
danger. The man who acquires a vast erudition may dull his imagination
and his judgment; the man who strains his brain to the utmost, who,
perhaps, overstrains it, in the solution of difficult problems, the
man whose mission lies in the domain of the emotions, exposes his mind
to injury. If there be truth in this, mysticism in poetry and art may
cause degeneration in the poet’s or the artist’s mind, especially if it
be a weak one; but to conclude from this that mysticism in art springs
from diseased minds is to confound cause with effect.

If we accept Nordau’s Philistine definition of art and his views as
to its mission, mysticism would have no place in art or in poetry.
He would certainly exclude it, but in doing so he would contradict
himself glaringly. We have already complained that he does not explain
his standards, and that he does not give his ideals. But from his work
before us, it is evident that the standard by which he would measure
poetry is the work of Goethe and Shakespeare, especially the former.
Goethe owes his fame largely to his _Faust_—a mystical work if ever
there was one. The prologue is religious mysticism, the first part is
diabolism, the second part is arch-mysticism, which so far has resisted
all attempts at interpretation. In the same manner _Hamlet_, _Macbeth_,
and other plays of Shakespeare derive their great charm and their
artistic value largely from mysticism.

All this however does not prove that either irrational or dishonest
mysticism is acceptable, and much that Nordau says regarding
pre-Raphaelitism should be taken to heart by the camp-followers of
the movement. In this term we include, of course, those painters
who, unable to draw and paint, try to force their pictures upon the
market by sheer bounce; and empty-headed critics who insolently
assume a mental, or, as they would call it, a spiritual, superiority
by writing obscure, unintelligible rigmaroles in praise of pictures
which attract attention by means of nought but their eccentricity.
This class of people cannot be considered as representing the
pre-Raphaelite movement, nor can they be called degenerate in the
sense Nordau means, for there is a method in their degeneracy which
yields pounds, shillings, and pence. We also include in this category
a class of people whose conceit may border on degeneracy, and who
believe that any one who cannot draw and paint is qualified for a
pre-Raphaelite painter, and who sincerely assume and enjoy the position
as misunderstood geniuses.

As to the crowds in the exhibitions that gather before an
incomprehensible eccentricity made conspicuous by the log-rolling
process, they surely do not all deserve the epithet of degenerates.
Many are drawn there by sheer curiosity; others damn with faint praise,
in order to escape the wrath of the fanatic. There are also, of
course, many who, for the purpose of giving themselves airs, admire
traits of beauty which they really fail to see. The behaviour of these
hypocritical æsthetes is, of course, deplorable, but they yield to a
weakness not confined to the end of our century. Andersen’s story of
the king’s clothes, inspired by a very old German tale, is one of many
evidences of the antiquity of such folly.

The sincere pre-Raphaelites deserve the sympathy of every thinking man,
though they may be guilty of many imperfections. According to Nordau,
the mission of the painter is to serve as a vehicle of beautiful
impressions to the public. A man who fulfilled this mission might
indeed be called an artist, and his painting might be the limits of
painting as such. But this does not prevent a picture from containing
a story, a moral, or the expression of an emotion, if the painter be a
good story-teller, a true poet, and a sound teacher. If a work of art
can thus fulfil two high purposes instead of one, everybody is a gainer
by it, and the fact that it is the embodiment of two arts instead of
one cannot reasonably be made an objection. The artist who succeeds in
thus blending two arts should surely not be called a degenerate.

Ruskin did not, as Nordau confesses, advocate any neglect in the art
of painting as such, but he warned artists not to waste their time on
unworthy subjects. He is a philanthropist as well as a writer on art,
and feels aggrieved when the artist neglects so good an opportunity of
teaching as a well-executed painting offers, and yet more when he sees
art abased in order to gratify sensuality or morbid cravings for the
horrible.

That Ruskin did not so absolutely disregard beautiful pictures which
have no story to tell and no teaching to impart becomes incontestable
when we remember his panegyrics of Turner.

Victor Hugo in his _Notre Dame de Paris_ makes Claude Frollo say,
when he has a book in his hand and the old cathedral before him, that
the one will kill the other, meaning, of course, that books were
predestined to supersede symbolism in buildings and other arts. Nordau
takes for granted that this has already been done. He sees no good
in works of art giving expression to ideas and emotions which could
so much better be described and more clearly defined in books. But
is there not a great inconsistency in first admitting that art keeps
within its rational limit when it presents the beauties of nature to
the public in such a manner as to make them more evident, which is
equal to teaching that nature is beautiful, and then to say that art
oversteps its limits when it teaches, or attempts to teach, anything
else?

If we survey all the means available to humanity for the conveyance
of thoughts and emotions, they present a scale which begins by speech
and ends with music. Though it must be acknowledged that speech only
with difficulty lends itself to the expression of one or a considerable
number of interdependent and intertangent complex ideas perfectly
clear in a sound mind, it is however the best means we possess for
lucid expression. Written prose has the same merit as speech, and may
be used to express the driest mathematical facts, as well as the most
poetical imaginings. Verse, we think it will be generally allowed,
is better calculated to convey poetical ideas and expressions, as it
admits of greater liberty, more stirring language, bolder metaphors,
and because rhythm and rhyme, in virtue of their musical qualities,
appeal to the imagination and stir the emotions.

When to poetry melody is added, it becomes song, a mode of expression
which appeals fully as much to our emotional nature as to our
intellect. When instrumental music is added to song, to evoke emotion
becomes the cardinal object, and intellect receives hardly any
impression. Music without words is the mode of conveying emotions—and
possibly ideas, too subtle, so to say, too spiritual to be analysed by
the intellect—in so distinct a way that the emotions of the composer,
and may be of the performer, are faithfully reproduced in the hearers.
A mutual understanding is thus established between them as clearly as
any understanding arrived at through exhaustive verbal explanation.

Scientists have endeavoured to explain on materialist lines the charm
exercised by music over us, but their explanations obviously never
touch more than the mechanical motion of the sound-waves and the
receptive mechanism of the ear and the brain. Their dogmatizing is
moreover so dry, halting, and one-sided as to convince musical people
that their attempt at explanation is hopeless. Music belongs to the
sphere of emotions, which lie beyond the ken of science, and will be as
long as scientific progression is hampered by the materialist bias.

And yet the most unimaginative scientist will not deny that all the
methods of conveying ideas and emotions enumerated in the above scale,
including instrumental music, are legitimate arts. Why then should
there not be the same latitude allowed to the arts appealing to us
through the sight as to those appealing to us through the hearing? If
the architect, sculptor, or painter, or two of them, or even three of
them, combined in collaboration, wishing to convey an impression, or
to evoke an emotion, why should they not be allowed to do so by any
of the means which fall within their sphere? If they should wish to
evoke emotions similar to those evoked by music, and they can do so by
choosing a certain subject, by introducing certain symbols, or even by
recalling sentiments of the past—the time of our first love, our youth,
or even our childhood,—why should they not be free to do so?

The pre-Raphaelites claim the freedom to thus expand the scope of
pictorial art, to sanctify it, and to make it appeal to the inmost
recesses of our emotional nature; and as the movement was started at
a time when art was in decadence and tended to become subservient,
abroad to pruriency, and at home, to abominable Philistinism, the
pre-Raphaelites deserve a better treatment than they have received at
the hands of Nordau.

That they should commit mistakes was inevitable. It is probable that
they had not realized completely to themselves the exact results to be
aimed at. Like the composer of music, they wished to convey to others
such of their own emotions as they deemed legitimate, beautiful, and
ennobling, and had to grope in the dark, or to trust to momentary
inspiration, for the means. Being, and wishing to be emotional, they
may have neglected their intellectual powers, forgetting that even
when emotion reigns supreme it can express itself truly only by the
aid of intelligence. Vivid emotions and powerful imaginations are not
in themselves stigmata of degeneration, but rather the signs of a rich
mind, so long as they remain under the control of the intellect. It is
only when they run riot, unheeding the criticism of intellect, that the
balance of the mind is imperilled.

In their desire to emphasize the spiritual meaning and the emotional
nature of their works, the pre-Raphaelites may have committed the
mistake of neglecting execution, truthfulness to nature, and the laws
of optics. Finding pictures appreciated by the public in virtue of the
subject and the conception, despite faulty treatment, many of them no
doubt have been induced to realize their ideas and emotions on canvas
before they had sufficiently trained their eye and their hand.

Every educated Englishman will understand that Nordau somewhat distorts
facts and conveys wrong impressions in the account he gives of the
movement. Though the pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood was dissolved, the
movement has not been so devoid of results as he insinuates. Though the
first exhibition of the Brotherhood was also the last one, pictures
by the same artist have been constantly exhibited, and some of them
have fetched fabulous prices. He says that Millais, amongst others,
has retained that characteristic of the pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood
consisting of minuteness in details, draperies, and backgrounds. Any
one who has seen Millais’ striking portraits, his “Cherry Ripe,”
“Bubbles,” “Caller Herrings,” and other pictures could not possibly
make such an assertion. We must, of course, allow for the circumstance
that Nordau’s knowledge of the pictures he criticises is second-hand.

It is evident that he has not seen Millais’ latest pictures. Had he
done so, he would not have jeopardized his whole system of reasoning
by holding Millais up as an example of degeneration. Here, as in many
other cases, Nordau, while exhibiting an enormous erudition, reveals a
remarkable want of logic. To call Millais degenerate is a desperate way
out of a dilemma in which he has landed himself by asserting, on the
one hand, that those who paint pictures such as Millais painted years
ago are people with degenerate brains, and, on the other, that people
who produce pictures such as Millais paints now are people of sound
mind. If degeneration is the first step towards a high, normal, and
sound development, Nordau has been guilty of much ado about nothing.

Had he ever beheld Holman Hunt’s “Shadow of the Cross” even in an
engraving, he could not in his description of it have committed the
mistakes he has unless his mind is impervious to pictorial impressions.
He says that “the shadow of his (Christ’s) body falling on the ground
shows the form of a cross.” This is not true. The shadow of Christ’s
body falls on the wall, where a tool shelf and suspended tools simulate
a cross. Nordau’s erroneous description will certainly prejudice those
who have not seen the picture against Holman Hunt.

It is natural that the materialist, the pseudo-scientifically
superstitious, and the Philistine tendencies of our age, so eminently
embodied in the mind of Nordau, and against which the pre-Raphaelite
school is a protest, should militate against a fair appreciation of the
tentative departure of these innovators.

The essence of their mysticism and their symbolism is their belief
in what, for lack of a better term, has been called their spiritual
life—the belief that the mind is not a condition of matter, but
that our thinking _Ego_ might have existed before it was incarnated,
and that it will live after our body has decayed. Could our earthly
existence be proved finite with certainty, could any future existence
be proved a vain dream, incompatible with reason, then indeed would
pre-Raphaelitism be the beginning of folly, as, in fact, would most of
the things which now tend to lighten and beautify our lives. We shall
not here endeavour to determine the five-thousand-year-old discussion
regarding eternal life. We shall simply point out that the proofs on
which the so-called materialists base their conclusions are not so
absolutely convincing as to stigmatize their opponents as lunatics.

Any one who has glanced at the development of science from old times
up to the present is well aware of that weakness in the mind of
scientists—especially the non-pioneer scientists—which induces them
to believe that the conclusions they have arrived at, generally in
opposition to predecessors, are the whole truth and nothing but the
truth. For thousands of years it has been the same. For each step
that science has climbed upwards, its votaries, with a few brilliant
exceptions, have believed themselves to be at the top, and have with
scorn rejected, as sheer folly, any suggestion that the step on which
they stand is rotten and that there are sounder steps higher up. The
scientists of other days in their turn looked upon Columbus, Galileo,
and Tycho Brahe as fools. A hundred years ago the scientists would have
laughed to scorn any one who had told them that their senses deceived
them with regard to light, darkness, colours, silence and sound,
and that all these presentations received by our senses were simply
movement or manifestations of energy. The theory which regarded atoms
as minute subdivisions of matter is quite a modern dogma, and yet it is
already tottering to its fall. More rational scientists already speak
of atoms as centres of force, an expression which twenty years ago was
regarded as rank heresy. If the theory that atoms are centres of force
is accepted, with all its consequences, science is on the threshold of
a new departure which may cause the materialists to look small indeed;
for if what to our senses appears as matter is a condition of force,
instead of force being a condition of matter, a vista entirely opposite
to that of the materialists is open to science—a vista disclosing
possibilities before which we might well stand in awe.

Though it is incontestable that invention and discovery have been
enormously accelerated by often apparently wild suggestions by the
imagination, by emotion, and by instinct, it is especially such
suggestions which are visited by the most furious onslaughts on the
part of the superstitious scientists. When these reject as utter folly
imaginings prompted by faith or any other emotions, it is because such
suggestions are not only entirely out of harmony with the scientific
ideas of the moment, but because they appear so extraordinary, so
utterly destructive to the views familiar to them. They would be
less positive in face of suggestions and speculations justified by
emotion, if they did not constantly forget that every scientific
discovery reveals facts which are not only diametrically opposed to
opinions previously held, but also so marvellous as to baffle human
understanding. Bearing recent scientific discovery in mind, no one
will deny the folly of the man who a hundred years ago would have
prophetically declared: “What we now have proved true and reasonable
will in a hundred years be proved error and folly, and what to us now
appears as sheer madness and rank impossibility will then be scientific
truth.”

Any contemporary scientist, unaffected by scientific superstition,
would unhesitatingly acknowledge the probability of present scientific
dogmas being declared errors, and that what would now appear as the
hallucinations of an overheated imagination may become scientific truth
a century hence.

Though the narrow-minded scientist who takes up his stand on the so
far explored speck of the universe has no right to blame the artist or
poet who, guided by emotion and faith, plunges his imagination into
the surrounding abyss of the mystical, which no well-balanced mind
can ignore, it would be both unjust and absurd to blame the prosaic
and plodding scientist who concentrates his whole mind on scientific
details, and, to use a happy metaphor of Nordau himself, is building a
bridge, arch by arch, out into the unknown. It is good that the Alpine
climber should concentrate his attention on the steps he hews in the
ice and the safe resting-point he can find for his feet, and not allow
his mind to wander in the dark precipice below him or among the lofty
peaks he hopes to reach. Man being two personalities, one emotional,
the other intellectual, stands in need of the services of both the
logical scientist and the emotional artist and poet.

Once it has been recognised that the emotions may be conveyed by
pictorial art, we cannot quarrel with the _raison d’être_ of the
pre-Raphaelites, though we might disagree with them as to the means
they are using. They can however justly demand that those who criticise
their means of expression should show the possibility of better ones.
Holman Hunt has aimed at evoking by his pictures a feeling of respect
and admiration for religion, and in many cases has succeeded; and
the means he has employed are a reverential treatment, a style of
old associated with religious representations and suggestions of the
supernatural. Burne Jones, whose object seems to be to emphasize the
higher significance of our spiritual being over our bodily, does so
by giving us pictures of maidens whose beauty is of a kind devoid of
all those attractions which coquetry, roguishness, animal spirits,
and exuberance of health may confer. Their vacant and inward look
suggests a contemplative mood and a yearning to see the invisible. As
if to still further quicken the sluggish imagination of the masses, he
cloaks his figures in draperies and surrounds them by objects which of
old have been used in representing holy people. He comes as near as
possible to the representation of wingless angels, without presenting
anything that could not be seen in reality.

Such pictures may not appeal to everybody, but we have overwhelming
evidence that they do appeal to a great number; and if the belief
in a superiority over animals, in a spiritual personality, in a
responsibility for our development, and in a future life contributes
to our happiness and exercises an ennobling influence on our race, the
pictures of Burne Jones cannot be the work of a degenerate aiming at
the degeneration of others.

What by many is considered Rossetti’s masterpiece, “Dante’s Dream,”
would by a painter, in his capacity of craftsman, be found to contain
many defects, and only one great merit—exquisite colouring. The
conception is eccentric, the surroundings are symbolic and mystical,
and the anatomy is incorrect. There are faults of perspective, some
of them glaring. For instance, the left shoulder of the angel of
love who stands on the left hand of Beatrice, facing her and bending
over her, is partly hidden by Beatrice’s right shoulder, which could
not be possible in reality unless the two figures had only two
dimensions—height and breadth, with no thickness. And yet this picture
has been bought by the Corporation of Liverpool for a large sum, and is
considered as a thing of joy and beauty by a mass of people among whom
Nordau could detect but a few with malformations of the heads and the
ears, and who in the whole of their life have given abundant proof of
practical rationalism far greater even than that of the superstitious
peasant he instances as having a sound mind.

The charm of the picture does not lie in the execution, but in the
conception. It is probable that it evokes exactly the same emotion felt
by Rossetti while painting it. The subject being a dream, the many
symbols tend to throw the spectator into the mood in which the picture
should be contemplated. There is an atmosphere of Sabbath—presentiment
of bliss—which is produced by the introduction of such presentations
which in our youth or childhood have been associated with that day.
The artist has succeeded in intensifying the belief in the sacredness
of love and the consolations which, amid the troubles of life, may be
drawn from the faith in a spiritual existence.

The conceiving and representing of pictures like this, the outcome of
intense emotion, might well endanger the balance of the painter’s mind,
but the soothing influence they exercise on the spectator would surely
assuage rather than excite any restless mind which, deprived of a
profound philosophy and a far-reaching scientific knowledge, must needs
cling to faith.

The painter who produces on the canvas a beautiful scene from nature,
beautiful flowers, or other beautiful objects, pleases and elevates
the beholders of the picture. Nordau admits as much. But he does not
analyse the methods by which this result is accomplished. He would
probably not deny that one of the feelings which such a picture calls
forth is a sympathy with nature and the Creator, and that this sympathy
favours the conception of the distinct idea that the great power of the
universe suggested by natural beauties—as the painter is suggested by
the picture—loves the beautiful, and consequently the good.

The signification of the pre-Raphaelites in the progress of art is
that they strive to teach, in the production of groups and figures,
similar emotions and thoughts to those produced by the representation
of natural beauties. They have therefore contributed considerably
to the elevation of art so far as aims and subjects go. If they
believe that a purpose can be attained only by the imitation of the
unskilled pre-Raphaelite painters, by violating nature, by eliminating
perspective, and by apotheosizing ugliness, they do not further that
regeneration which we believe they are striving for. But there is every
reason to hope that modern art will come out ennobled from the crisis
into which it has been plunged, and that rising painters will see their
way to paint reverently and realize their noblest aims and highest
ideals, represented in naturally beautiful forms, painted with the
greatest skill of a painter proud of his craft.

Whether this hope be realized or not, it seems to us that a
regeneration of art would be impossible without the attempts at new
departure which Nordau has mistaken for degeneration.




CHAPTER IV

_THE BANKRUPTCY OF SCIENCE_


In his chapter entitled “Symbolism” Nordau seeks confirmation for his
theory of degeneration in the tendency, more or less perceptible all
the world over, on the part of contemporary artists and poets, to
have recourse to symbols in giving expression to ideas and emotions
impossible to convey in ordinary language. Every one who has had to
do with intricate syntheses of ideas, even of the driest and the most
clearly definable kind, is well aware that language often appears
inadequate to convey such syntheses from one mind to another. How
much more difficult then must it be to convey in exact language a
presentation conjured up from the imagination, an artistic conception,
a poetical mood, a strong emotion, or a chord of emotions, to use an
expression that may in itself serve as an illustration. The use of
symbols, as we have just used the word chord, has not only enormously
widened the capability of language, but has rendered it far more lucid,
laconic, and agreeable.

A modern orator, or writer, could not possibly dispense with symbols,
for without them his speeches or his books would be intensely wordy,
tiresome, and difficult to comprehend. Language is constantly being
enriched by new symbols, either invented and introduced by authors, or
taken from such literary works as have become classic. Often an author
creates a character or an idea which typifies characters and situations
frequently met with, and for which symbols have long been needed. Thus,
for instance, Andersen’s _Ugly Duckling_ became a symbol largely used
as soon as his fable was published, and when Ibsen’s _Doll’s House_ was
played for the first time in London, one newspaper, which, by the way,
took Nordau’s view of Ibsen and declared his characters impossible, in
another article, if we remember aright, on the subject of marriage,
used with great effect Ibsen’s Nora as a symbol.

But such symbols are as old as language, and the new tendency of
_littérateurs_ who call themselves, or who are called, symbolists,
is not to invent and to use symbols that stand for well-known and
perfectly undisputed characters and situations, but such as represent
new ideas, difficult to define, or undefinable, because incomplete, and
concerning emotions. The same authors are also prone to use symbols
for things, beings, and powers, the existence of which has not been
ascertained by the senses, but simply guessed at, or evolved from
consciousness.

Many such symbols were not symbols when first introduced into the
language, but nouns that stood for things, or beings, supposed to be
perfectly real. Thus, for instance, the word “devil,” which in olden
times stood for a satanic majesty, adorned with horns and tail, has
now become a convenient symbol, a thing only too real, but covering
such immense ground, and presenting such innumerable aspects, that a
symbol expressing the whole conception is extremely convenient. Nothing
is commoner than to hear a clergyman use the words “the devil” in his
sermon, though it be part of his creed and of his teachings that God is
so omnipresent throughout the universe that there is not a square inch
for a personal devil to place his foot on.

It is this kind of symbolism which Nordau is bent on crucifying as
degeneration. As we have already said, there is a general tendency
among artists to indulge in it, in order to produce moods and suggest
emotions. Thus, for example, in the picture spoken of in our last
chapter, “Dante’s Dream,” an atmosphere of love is represented by red
birds, and sleep is represented by poppies strewn on the floor. In
Rossetti’s picture Nordau would have taken objection to such symbols,
though he seems reconciled to the symbols used by Raphael and his
school, and would probably not object to those of German allegorical
painters and sculptors.

It is significant that the symbolism which he most vehemently holds up
as a stigma of degeneration, is that of the modern French poets who
have made religious symbolism their speciality. It is not difficult to
see why these have been chosen as the scapegoats for the symbolism of
every art and every country. It is true they boldly call themselves
symbolists. But this would not be enough to elicit from Nordau a
chapter of forty-five pages. Besides calling themselves symbolists,
they have the audacity to be French. Their symbolism is religious, and,
what is worse, is Roman Catholic, and, what is worst of all, it is
antagonistic to science.

Though the now prevailing love for symbols does not always manifest
itself in a religious way, it is natural for it to find its widest
application in speeches and writings on religion. Religion avowedly
deals with things not of this earth, is based not on knowledge and
investigation, but on faith, and appeals not to our intellect, but to
our emotional nature.

The French symbolists have created greater sympathy with their
religious views than might have been expected in our rational times
because, unlike the Catholic clergy of the past, they treat as symbols
what before were considered as representations of actual facts. They
are not orthodox; and if the Church of Rome is anxious, as it seems
to be, to turn this neo-Catholicism into a means of resuming its
influence, it can only do so by enormously modernizing its fundamental
ideas. It will be interesting to see whether the Church of Rome will
accept the symbolists as co-operators, or finally spurn them as
heretics.

What especially rouses the animosity of Nordau against the symbolists
is the fact that the new movement is based on the supposition that
science is bankrupt, or, in other words, that it has failed in all its
promises to humanity; that it has usurped the throne of religion under
false pretences; and that its incapacity to supplant religion has been
demonstrated by the latest scientific discoveries. According to the
idea underlying the French symbolist movement, science has during the
present century aimed at the destruction of religion, and has caused
religion to be neglected, discredited, and scorned.

Such a movement founded on such premises and aiming at such aims must
be of the greatest interest to any man who watches attentively the
development of our race. To study its true cause, its real nature, and
its real aims should be the desire of every earnest investigator; and
if Nordau falls back on obloquy, indelicate insinuations, and blunt
accusations, after the fashion of the militant _literati_ of the past,
the reason of his animosity is easily explained.

Nordau, like many scientists before him and with him, has taken sides
in the absurd fight—the _querelle allemande_—between science and
religion, which has done so much to discredit both. To the unprejudiced
observer, any scientist who joins in the fray is induced to do so
by his inability to distinguish between religion and church, and
consequently to realize that the whole progress of science during the
present century has had the result, amongst many others, of justifying
such an attitude of mind towards God, the original cause, universal
energy, or whatever scientists choose to call it, which religion
implies.

Whoever distinguishes between church and religion will at once
understand that an ascendency of religious views throughout the world
may be perfectly compatible with the decay of sectarian dogmas, and
that therefore many phenomena which appear to indicate the decay of
religious views—such as church-going, for example—may in reality mean a
deeper religious life. If we take a comprehensive view of that progress
in religious views which has been accelerated by science, we shall find
that church-going, the rosary, and the images of the saints indicate
the preliminary stages of a religious evolution which in its later
development requires truer expressions.

So long as we have such a number of sects and churches, many of which
differ essentially, and all of which differ to some extent, it cannot
affect any one’s feelings to be told that church is not religion.
It is this truth that science has accentuated, and the inevitable
consequence has been that the churches, though they at first might
have vehemently opposed certain scientific facts, and yet more certain
rash speculations founded on them, have afterwards quietly striven to
modify their views and their dogmas so that they should not clash with
absolute scientific truths. That many such attempts at reconciliation
between science and churches have been feeble and absurd does not
disprove, but confirms, the existence of the above tendency. Though
perhaps it would be difficult to give a true definition of religion
as distinguished from church, the conception which every thinking man
forms of it is probably clear enough to allow him to realize that some
churches are farther from the ideal than others.

If it be true that the progress of science has been instrumental in
impelling the development of churches in the direction of a future
religion of ideal beauty and ideal truth, and that such a religion must
necessarily be in complete harmony with scientific facts, then the
animosity of science and religion is to a sound mind incomprehensible.

Yet Nordau unhesitatingly takes for granted that religion and science
are naturally antagonistic. He takes very seriously the assumption of
the French neo-Catholics that henceforth science will have to make
room for religion. Had he any sense of humour, he would not have thus
betrayed how _jalousie de métier_ animates him to no small extent. He
mixes up science and the scientists in a most amusing manner when he
compares the neglected scientist with the idolized saint, and asks,
“What saintly legend is as beautiful as the life of an enquirer who
spends his existence bending over the microscope?” Does our alienist
aspire to go down to posterity with a halo around his head? He regrets
the good old time when the daily Press of that date said, “We live in
a scientific age,” when “the news of the day reported the travels and
the marriages of scientists, the _feuilleton_ novels contained witty
allusions to Darwin, etc.”

Nordau completely denies that there is any foundation for the assertion
of the French symbolists that science has become bankrupt—that it has
not fulfilled its promises to humanity. In order to refute it, he gives
us the long list of scientific achievements to which scientists who
militate against religion have accustomed us, beginning with spectrum
analysis and finishing up with instantaneous photography. He demands
for science the respect and trust of humanity, not only on the ground
of what science has accomplished, but also on the ground of what it
will accomplish.

His faith in his mission deserves sincere admiration, and proves him to
be one of those earnest enthusiasts who alone can advance humanity. But
he does not see that his prophecies regarding future achievements are
not science, but faith and religion—based, it is true, on reasonable
grounds, but still faith and religion.

Nor does he see that his proud asseveration of the achievements of
science, and his prophecy with regard to its future, do not constitute
a refutation to the cry of the symbolists that science is bankrupt.
The promises which the symbolists refer to as being dishonoured by
science, are not of the kind that could possibly be redeemed by the
achievements referred to in Nordau’s splendid list. They allude to
promises not really made by science, but by rash and prejudiced
scientists. These have over and over again proclaimed that religion had
been supplanted by science, and that science could, or else soon would,
explain all those mysteries which religion claimed to explain or to
symbolize, such as first causes, final aims, existence or non-existence
before birth and after death, the origin of evil, the essence of
morality, and so on. Science, according to them, was not only to
bring about perfect serenity in man’s mind regarding himself and the
universe, but to satisfy the mysterious longings and the uncontrollable
emotions, either hereditary, or part of man’s nature, which hitherto
religion alone had satisfied. Science was also to supply rational
motives for purity, morality, self-sacrifice, and all the virtues
and exertions which are indispensable to the elevation of our race.
Finally, science was to transform us into an ideal race, living in an
ideal manner, thus substituting a terrestrial heaven for humanity, for
the spiritual heaven which religion promised for the individual.

Nordau cannot blame the scientists who made these promises; for the
whole of his book shows that he is in entire sympathy with them.

There was a time when the educated world believed in the arrogant
promises of the scientists; when it confidently expected that
mysteries, so far unexplained, would be cleared up within a reasonable
time, and that systems and speculation, which were to take the place
of religion, would gradually be so amended as to become capable of
fulfilling so great an object.

But the rapid scientific discoveries which followed one upon each
other, far from tending to fulfil the promises of the scientists, had
the effect of persuading the world that science was not going to keep
any of these promises. For each mystery it unravelled revealed a series
of new mysteries behind it, and the explanatory task of science grew
with its own progress. In fact, while the explanations increased by
simple arithmetical progression, the mysteries rose up in geometrical
progression.

At the same time better schools, public lectures, and innumerable
periodicals initiated the masses into the secrets of the scientific
freemasonry, and people began to perceive that what they, in their
awe of science, believed to be perfect knowledge of the very essence
of the world-phenomenon was only a series of acute observations, an
intelligent classification, backed by arbitrary speculations and the
superstitious faith in the omnipotence of science, culminating simply
in a barren religion of humanity.

As to eternity and infinity of space, all that science could do
was to tell the masses not to trouble their heads about them; as
to causality, they were asked to regard it simply as “a form of
thought which had nothing to do with the phenomena.” As to morality,
the religion of humanity seemed extremely untrustworthy: for the
removal of all personal responsibility, and the certainty of complete
annihilation after death, seemed to give the strong-minded and clever
people the strongest possible inducement to make their fellow-beings
tools for their own happiness. The promised earthly paradise was not
only thousands of years ahead in time, but was to be constituted on
principles which even a superficial knowledge of economy and sociology
was bound to expose as an Inferno.

It was natural then that a great number of people, unable to climb to
the height of abstract and unsatisfactory reasoning of the kind that
the scientists had attained to, and whose emotional nature utterly
rebelled against a progression which was intended constantly to violate
their best instincts, should spurn science, which offered them no other
compensation than freedom from personal responsibility.

It was not only the hollow arrogance of the scientists and the failure
of science to fulfil the promises of its superstitious votaries which
had created disgust with scientific atheism: the practical results of
the anti-religious tendencies became alarmingly apparent; experience
began to prove that the discarding of all personal responsibility did
not produce the _ultra_ man—_der Uebermensch_—of which the scientists
claimed to be the prototypes.

Many of them had been in the habit of speaking scornfully of those
selfish natures who live irreproachable lives, and who devote
themselves to the promotion of the good of their fellow-men under the
impression that in a future state they would reap their reward. The
atheist-scientist represented himself as a man of different metal: he
was fully as moral as the religionist; he spent his life in serving
humanity, well knowing that his self-control and self-sacrifice
would bring him no reward; he did his duty, not induced by any mean,
religious consideration, but because he was a perfect man.

The lesser mortals, those from whose ranks the symbolists are
recruited, began to entertain doubts of the infallibility of these
first-fruits of the religion of humanity. The very arrogance of these
perfect men told against them. If they disbelieved in the rewards of a
future life, they were not averse to the rewards in this, and eagerly
accepted the money and the distinction their works brought them. There
was especially this about them: they unhesitatingly attacked that
which the masses could alone rely on for moral guidance, equanimity,
consolation, and encouragement—religion—while the religion of humanity
was thousands of years in the future, and thus left the people a prey
to mental bewilderment, doubt, and unrestrained passions. The scientist
stood accused of acting like a man depriving a cripple of his only
crutch, against the promise of supplying his remote descendants with
better ones.

But atheism had a far worse effect on ordinary mortals, who had not
to sustain a reputation as apostles of the new scientific creed.
Convinced that no personal responsibility attached to them, and caring
little for what would happen to the next generation, or still less to
generations thousands of years hence, they tried to persuade themselves
that conscience was an inherited weakness, developed by evolution, or
a product of wrong religious teaching. Wishing to rise above such a
weakness, they did their best to silence conscience, and to live for
self-gratification. In this manner selfishness, if not Egomania, was
strongly developed.

Capitalists and politicians strove to acquire wealth and power,
regardless of other people’s rights, of their own conscience, and of
their sense of honour, so long as their dishonour was known only to
themselves. Society became frivolous, and exhibited the same stigmata
of degeneration noticed before in decaying commonwealths. Art became
lascivious and corrupting; literature became realistic and offensive.
In fact, a host of clever men who ought to have been benefactors of
their race cared not to what extent they ruined and demoralized their
fellow-beings so long as they safeguarded their own health, their own
future, and their social position.

The working classes being told by men, far superior to them in
intellect and education, that their only chance was in their lives here
on earth, and that death was annihilation, began to sympathize with
violent Nihilists and Anarchists, and were less averse to risk their
lives, if it were only to avenge themselves on those who deprived them
of their terrestrial happiness.

But it was not only in the effect on their fellow-beings that the
neo-Catholics, the symbolists, and their sympathizers all over
the world beheld the results of scientific atheism. Many of these
themselves became “frightful examples” of these results. Nordau commits
a great mistake in studying the French symbolists as authors and poets.
It is as children of their times that they should be studied. He looks
upon them as causes of the symbolist movement, whereas we should
have regarded them as the indicators of a remarkable stage in the
development of our race.

It was inevitable that the theories of the scientists should have been
accepted more widely in France than in any other civilized country. In
the English-speaking countries the Churches and sects had not assumed
the same uncompromising attitude with regard to the mediæval doctrines
as the Church of Rome. They had gradually receded from one contested
point after another and many of their old forms and texts were given
a more liberal interpretation. Urged on by the example of the Broad
Church, the Congregationalists, and especially by the Unitarians, the
clergy and the ministers ceased their opposition to any established
scientific facts, though they rejected scientific speculations. The
influence of the scientists in the English-speaking countries tended
therefore to modernize religion, instead of bringing it into contempt.

In Germany, where the people are slow to oppose any authority, and
where they are extremely shy of their real religious opinions,
scientific atheism simply encouraged the free-thinkers existing there
of old and induced a mass of young men to masquerade as free-thinkers
who in reality held no opinions at all, and who were destined to become
devout in their old age.

In Italy and Spain the teachings of the scientists only somewhat
strengthened the hands of the Liberals, but produced no effect on the
Ultramontanes. In Russia, where the nobility and the middle classes
had for a long time been free-thinkers, or perhaps non-thinkers, in
regard to religious questions, the religion of humanity affected only
that portion of the people which was already under the influence of
Nihilism, and tended to render them more reckless.

In France however, and perhaps in such countries as are
directly influenced by French views—for instance, Belgium and
Switzerland,—circumstances were different. The atheism which broke out
with the first French Revolution had begun to subside, the nobility
and the upper classes were the allies of Rome partly by conviction
and partly from policy. In the country districts the _curés_ had
resumed their influence over the peasantry, but the labouring class
in the towns was divided into two camps, the free-thinkers and the
Ultramontanes; and the difference between them was emphasized by the
circumstance that the Ultramontanes were generally conservative in
siding with the powers that be, while the free-thinkers were more or
less extreme Republicans, Socialists, or Communists.

Such was the situation in France when the influence of the scientists
on religious opinion began to make itself felt there. The materialist
views were eagerly taken up by the Bohemians of Paris and by the
extreme wing of the Republican Press. The upper classes read, or
skimmed, the English scientists, and up to the beginning of the
Franco-German war the German philosophers were much in vogue amongst
the upper classes and in literary circles. In this fashion the Church
of Rome had to face an attack differing widely from the French
Revolution. Then the corruption, and the siding of the Church with
those who were regarded as the enemies of the country, exposed it
to open violence prompted by strongly roused passions. During the
latter days of the Second Empire it was assailed in its dogmas with
arms borrowed from scientific research and speculation. The latter
attack was by far the more dangerous. The discontent with the Imperial
Government did much to draw the urban working classes into the ranks
of the free-thinkers, where the theories of the scientists confirmed
them in their new atheism. Parisian society had become atheistic, and
the whole male population of the middle class prided themselves on
their freedom from all religious prejudices. What remained of religion
in France was represented by the old nobility, who had a political
interest in being religious; by the peasants, who were supposed to be
too stupid to grasp the new scientific truths; by old men, who had not
the courage to face the grave without the consolation of religion; and
by the women, to whom, it was confessed even by the most debauched
_roués_, religion gave an extra charm.

When the Third Republic was launched it had a strong atheistic
character, and the working classes in all the cities, the sincere
free-thinkers, patriots, and philanthropists, hoped that under
a Republican form of government the religion of humanity of the
scientists would at last have a fair trial. But they were destined to
bitter disappointment. The new Republic turned out to be _bourgeois_
in the worst sense of the word. Politics passed into a profession.
Politicians and administrators became corrupt. Scandals multiplied.
Even the Press was unable to show clean hands. Wealth became
all-powerful, and the plutocrats acquired an enormous influence which
they did not hesitate to use to their own advantage. Speculators
and adventurers pulled the strings of the home, and especially of
the colonial, policy, and in order to further private interests the
indebtedness of the State was carried to such a point as to threaten
the most gigantic financial catastrophe the world has ever witnessed.
In the meantime the working classes and even the agriculturists
naturally suffered from the result of a system of government which
disregarded their interests. The proletariat of the cities grew, labour
troubles became frequent, wages fell, and poverty rapidly increased.

While this growing penury invaded the homes of the working and
lower middle class of a nation which has only partially realized
the happiness and healthy influence flowing from decent and moral
homes, scientific atheism took possession of the minds of the people,
especially of the men. It urged them to make the most of their lives,
and enticed them into a whirlpool of dissipation.

Scientific atheism was bound to produce a vast increase in immorality
in a country like France, where the Church of Rome, in order to enhance
its influence over the people, favours unhappy relations between the
sexes. The clergy do all they can to estrange the sexes prior to
marriage, and thus prevent pure love and love-marriages, while they
encourage _mariages de convenance_. They are animated no doubt by the
best intentions, but, living themselves in enforced celibacy, have no
idea to what an extent they thus undermine the morality of the people.

As love counts for little in the tying of the matrimonial knot, and the
_dot_ counts for much, French unendowed girls stand a poor chance of
ever getting married. This exclusion of an enormous number of the best
women from the marriage market explains, to a large extent, the many
irregular households to be met with in France. The fact that lovable
and high-souled women accept the position of mistresses has largely
tended to multiply mock marriages. The refusal on the part of the
Church of Rome to permit divorce, and the lovelessness of the regular
alliances, tend in the same direction. The sum total of all this is
that a majority of Frenchwomen have to choose between an unhappy
married life without love, and an immoral one with it. Those who are
forced into the former in a great many cases seek consolation in an
illicit _liaison_; those who drift into the latter become debauched.
While thus the young, respectable, and pure-minded girls are relegated
to schools and nunneries and excluded from all association with
young men, among these licentious pleasure often takes the place of
romantic love. Hence physically and morally unhealthy lives, absence of
happiness, craving for excitement, morbid passions, pessimism, contempt
for life, depraved tastes, hysteria.

Scientific atheism had however only aggravated a state of things
created by sacerdotal influence on social habits. But it was only
natural that a nation, so biassed in social questions as France, should
ascribe the decay of morality and of so many other virtues to the
weakening of that influence which for centuries had proclaimed itself,
and had been considered by the masses as the only check upon wickedness
among great and small alike.

Hosts of young men who entered life with noble aspirations to fight for
high ideals, soon perceived, when left to shift for themselves, that
the society around them irresistibly opposed the realization of their
hopes. They found it difficult, almost impossible, to reconcile success
with self-esteem, love with morality, and their poetical aspirations
with their manner of living. Many, in despair of happiness and success,
or in order to forget their crumbled illusions, threw themselves into
a feverish quest for excitement, in which health of body and mind were
jeopardized.

Awakening to the full consciousness of the depth of their fall, they
could not fail to see that the social system under which they lived
was largely responsible for their miseries. In looking back over
their wasted lives they saw nought but shattered hopes. What they had
forfeited were a happy and vigorous youth, transports of romance, the
love of a pure-minded woman, a strong and active manhood, a chivalrous
fight for the good, the pure, the true, and the beautiful, the respect
of their fellow-men, an ideal home.

The social conditions which they held responsible for their miserable
career, and even for the regret they experienced, could not be laid at
the door of an Emperor or a dynasty: for their country was governed by
universal suffrage. Finding government, legislation, institutions, and
social conditions vitiated, they had to blame Society. They found that
Society was atheistic, and was deprived of the only check and guide
that came within their ken—religion. They were filled with an intense
longing to destroy the atheism which science had created, and to return
to a belief which would re-endow Society with moral order, health,
romance, love, purity, and beautiful emotions.

Science was the enemy, as under the Empire the priest was the enemy.
To discredit it was the first essential step. When therefore the
actual power of science, its actual possibilities, became popularized,
and each successive scientific discovery rendered the prophecies of
the superstitious scientists more and more preposterous, the French
symbolists took up the cry that science was bankrupt.




CHAPTER V

_SYMBOLISM AND LOGIC_


The French symbolists, and all poets and artists who move in the
world of emotions, are invited by Nordau to “take their place at the
table of science, where there is room for all.” Were they to accept
the invitation, how would the emotional nature of our race find
expression? Would it be possible, or wise, to ignore emotions in face
of the fact that our lives are essentially emotional? Or does Nordau
push his scientific superstition to such a point as to believe that
human emotions can ever be investigated by means of the lancet, the
microscope, and the thermometer? In spite of his sneer at Rossetti’s
remark regarding his indifference as to whether the sun turned round
the earth or the earth turned round the sun, he cannot fail to
acknowledge that what humanity yearns for is beautiful and pleasing
emotions, not scientific facts. The glorious sunshine, the balmy
breeze, the radiant flowers, the inscrutable attractions of woman, her
love, her esteem, her faith, the affection of children, the confidence
of our fellow-beings, our trust in the good, our struggle against
evil—such are the elements of life and happiness. Science acquires all
its importance from being the means by which beautiful and pleasing
emotions are safeguarded, and unpleasant emotions are avoided. When
science mistakes its mission, when it attempts to distort and vilify
their expressions, it has become unreal and fatal.

Nordau wishes us to regard science—progressing as it has done by
replacing old errors of our senses by new errors of our senses—as
embodying all facts worth noticing, and to disregard emotions which are
eternally unchangeable.

To turn our back upon emotions and to take our place at the table of
science means to ignore all that is beautiful, lovable, ennobling, and
hopeful, to shut our eyes to the charms of form, colour, motion, and
our ears to music, and to concentrate our attention upon the repast
spread on the table of science: the pleasure of discovering bacteria in
human tissue, the curiosity of counting the throbs of a frog’s heart
after being torn from the living body, the sensation of ascertaining
the effect of the gastric juices on the foot of a living rabbit
inserted into a living dog’s stomach.

We take no side in the question of vivisection, or any other scientific
methods, but without in the least minimizing the great services
rendered, and to be rendered, by science to humanity, we must express
our astonishment that any sound mind, knowing what scientific methods
are, and must be, can seriously suggest that scientific investigation
should supersede art and poetry. If we believed in degeneration, such
opinions would be the first examples of it we should quote.

Poets and philosophers who deal with emotions, so to say with
immaterial phenomena, impalpable to every one of our senses, but
demonstrated as eternally real by their effects, must needs make use
of symbols, or, to be more exact, of more symbols, vaguer symbols,
and bolder symbols than those which naturally enter into language. To
deny them this right is equal to denying the mathematician the use
of the letter _X_, which stands for unknown quantities, and which is
handled by him as dexterously as if it were the most familiar object
in the world. If human beings were not allowed to speak about what
their imagination conjures up, what their feelings prompt, and what
irresistible instincts point to, they would be brought alarmingly near
to the level of the beast.

The French symbolists being poets, might not have formulated into
distinct thoughts what we have said above, but they have certainly
felt it all, and much more. They have felt themselves surrounded by
undefined and undefinable _X’s_ of far greater moment to their lives,
to their happiness, and to their best instincts, than all the known
and half-known quantities of science. In attempting to give expression
to their feelings and to their thoughts regarding the all-important
unknown, and to evoke among their fellow-beings an interest in them,
they have found themselves justified in using any means, including
symbolism, for their purpose.

Nordau has entertained no such considerations in dealing with the
French symbolists. In obedience to his professional prejudices, he
looks for no other causes, no other influences, than those that can be
found in the mechanism of their brains. This is all the more amazing
as he over and over again recognises that external circumstances,
conditions of life and habits, exercise a strong influence on the
brain, or, in other words, that the mechanism which connects the _Ego_
with matter may be influenced by the _Ego_. The result of his criticism
presents therefore a want of fairness which to the English mind is
especially objectionable.

The manner in which he pries into the private life and antecedents
of Paul Verlaine, and the indelicate manner in which he refers to
the personal appearance of the poet, impress us English people as so
many unfair means of giving plausibility to his conclusions. When a
hunchback is good-humoured enough to make fun of his own deformity,
those of gentle feelings sympathize all the more with his misfortune,
and become all the more anxious not to refer to it. When a poet, in
his love of truth and in his anxiety to rouse a certain emotion, makes
confessions, when he instances his own sad experiences and failings,
when he, so to say, throws himself into the flames on the altar of
truth, we in England count it indelicate and unfair to base criticism
on facts thus revealed. Had Nordau read Verlaine’s poetry with an
unbiassed mind, he could not have failed to be struck by the extent to
which the poet typifies the movement going on around him: his failings,
his errors, and, maybe, his bad habits—all this is the fate of millions
who have been induced by the materialist tendencies of recent times
to disregard personal responsibility, and who, after rejecting such
guides as the nobler instincts of humanity had proffered, attempt to
follow the dictates of the lower instincts and animal impulses. His
terrible remorse and despair, while he is still unmoved by religion,
bear witness to aspirations which the materialist would fain deny.
His instinctive groping for the consolations of religion shows to
what an extent he attributes his failings to an irreligious life, and
that he experiences within him yearnings for a happiness which the
gratification of the senses, prompted by atheism, has never afforded
him.

Nordau would object to this expression—the gratification of his senses
prompted by atheism—and would tell us that atheism ought to have
implanted into Verlaine the religion of humanity, and that he should
have sacrificed all his inclinations for the future happiness of his
race. But, surely, it would require a good dose of hypocrisy for a
man, sincerely convinced that death puts him personally beyond any
consequences of his life, to persuade himself that he is practising
a life-long abnegation for the good of posterity. Is it not much
more likely that in so frank a nature as Verlaine’s the disbelief in
personal responsibility would turn him into a devil-may-care vagabond
until he learned in the school of experience the dangerous mistakes of
materialism? Does Nordau not recognise the logic and the frankness in a
young man who, in the exuberance of his animal life, when convinced of
personal irresponsibility, lives up to the motto of a “short life and a
merry one”?

The need of love and affection—a need generally so strongly felt by
all poets—Nordau is pleased to call eroticism, and when the poet finds
that he has profaned love, implanted in his soul by God, Nordau fancies
he has discovered in Verlaine that blending of religious fervour and
morbid eroticism which, when irrational, is a sign of lunacy.

When Paul Verlaine invokes the Virgin Mary, a form of religious
expression which millions of sane people indulge in daily, Nordau at
once imagines he has discovered another trace of insanity. In order to
show that we are not unfair to our alienist, we will quote one of the
poems of Verlaine he refers to, and the conclusions he draws from it,—

    Et comme j’étais faible, et bien méchant encore,
    Aux mains lâches, les yeux éblouis des chemins,
    Elle baissa mes yeux, et me joignis les mains,
    Et m’enseigna les mots par lesquels on adore.

“The accents here quoted,” says Nordau, “are well known to the clinics
of psychiatry. We may compare them to the picture which Legrain gives
of some of his patients. ‘His speech continually reverts to God and the
Virgin Mary, his cousin.’ [The case in question is that of a degenerate
subject who was a tramway conductor.] ‘Mystical ideas complete the
picture. He talks of God, of heaven, crosses himself, kneels down, and
says that he is following the commandments of Christ.’ [The subject
under observation is a day-labourer.] ‘The devil will tempt me, but I
see God who guards me. I have asked of God that all people might be
beautiful,’ etc.”

So far Nordau.

Because a mad tramway conductor thinks he is cousin of the Virgin
Mary, Verlaine, who symbolizes in the Virgin Mary the power that draws
him towards the good, is on the road to madness! From this it follows
that, if a mad tramway conductor were to believe himself the cousin
of Professor Lombroso, Nordau’s quasi-worship of that authority would
indicate degeneracy in Nordau’s mind.

One of Nordau’s characteristics is a weak or dull logical faculty,
often to be observed in those who over-study for examination and in
specialists fanatically inclined. Without this peculiarity he could
not possibly have omitted to ask himself the question, “How about
all other worshippers of Christ?” when he concludes that Verlaine’s
mind is degenerate because he speaks devotedly of the Virgin Mary,
while a lunatic labourer says that he follows the commandments of
Christ. Nordau does not see that in this manner he completely gives
himself away, and lets us perceive that it is not the symbolist whom
he considered degenerate, but the whole Christian populations of the
world that have existed during two thousand years, and that still
exist. Only his lack of a sense of the ridiculous, already pointed out,
has prevented him from remembering that the man in his cups considers
himself the only sober man of the company.

The verses which Verlaine has written in praise of a vagabond life
Nordau holds up as a sure sign of lurking lunacy. Are then all poets
who write in praise of a vagabond life degenerates? Is not the true
secret of Nordau’s conclusion to be found in the fact that he entirely
misses the satire against our modern system which underlies Verlaine’s
and other writers’ poems on this same subject? He does the same with
regard to Verlaine’s poem addressed to the demented king, Louis II. of
Bavaria. When we behold the follies of reigning sovereigns, who are
supposed to be in the full enjoyment of their faculties, making such
poor use of their opportunities, degrading and ruining their people,
rousing a hatred against themselves and their dynasty, or striving at
low _bourgeois_ aims, or even, to use Nordau’s own expression, selling
their royalty for a big cheque; when we read of the monarchs of the
past, of their crimes and their meanesses, how can we wonder that the
unfortunate King Louis should inspire sympathy in a poet, and that he
should satirize the so-called reasonable monarchs by eulogizing the
demented one?

Nordau makes much of that form of mental weakness which manifests
itself in echolalia, or the mania of repeating for no reason the
same words and the same sentences. But to deny the poet, who aims at
conveying an emotion and for that purpose wishes to create a certain
mood in his listeners, the use of choruses, refrains, and cadenced
repetitions, he runs counter to the oldest literary tradition in the
world. He would surely not object to repetitions in verses intended to
be sung; and if we are right in placing poetry half way between speech
and music in the list of the vehicles of thought, as we have done in a
previous chapter, euphonies, musicalities of words, and repetitions are
both permissible and rational.

Many poetical emotions may be quickened by reminiscences from
childhood; and a style of writing, or the use of words or sounds,
reminding us of early days, might be the most effective methods
of expression. Thus, for instance, a drowsy repetition of
pleasant-sounding words may be very telling in a lullaby, even if
they convey no scientific meaning, or do not contribute to the sense
of the poem, and so long as they do not distort it. The examples of
repetitions from degeneracy in Verlaine are chosen so unhappily
as to place Nordau in the wrong and Verlaine in the right in the
judgment of unbiassed persons; the one is a serenade, and the other
is entitled “Chevaux du Bois,” in which the sensation of a child on
a merry-go-round is suggested. Another is supposed to be sung by, or
suggests, Pierrot Gamin, that is a young idiot. When Verlaine wishes to
qualify a noun in a manner which is difficult to express in ordinary
adjectives, he, like millions of his fellows, has recourse to the
method of giving a new, or symbolic, signification to an old adjective,
and this, according to Nordau, is a sign of mental degeneration. To
prove his case he quotes such terms as “a narrow and vast affection,”
“a slow landscape,” “a slack liqueur,” “a gilded perfume,” “a terse
contour,” etc. He does not seem to know that the paucity of language
renders such expressions not only legitimate but extremely useful in
many professions and trades, let alone poetry. Has he never heard
of a warm colour, a lively tint, a cold tone, etc.? Are the French
wine-growers mad when they say that wine is heavy, light, full, dead,
alive, slack, round, green, angular, smooth, velvety, etc.?

We are glad to see that he recognises Verlaine’s ability as a poet and
does not find fault with some of his poems. Thus he says of “Chanson
d’Automne” that “there are few poems in French literature that can
rival” it. While rejoicing at the fairness that Nordau here displays,
we must however point out the eccentricity of his logic. He desires
to warn us against degeneration, and therefore points to a poet
whose degeneracy has not prevented him from writing a masterpiece of
literature. It should also be noticed that the “Chanson d’Automne,”
which meets with such ample praise from Nordau, is on the same theme
which underlies other pieces of poetry quoted in his work as examples
of legitimate and sane poetry. When he does intimate that a poet might
burst into song over flowers, trees, books, and twittering birds, but
not over the sympathy he feels in his consciousness with the powers
that have called them forth, simply because science has not so far been
able to analyse and classify those powers, he only shows that he is
illogical enough to proffer his limited view of what is poetical as an
infallible standard of the poetry of the world.

Nordau blames Verlaine and other symbolists for dealing with moods
instead of with definite ideas. But is there a single poet in the
past or the present who did not largely deal in moods, and who did
not labour to give the world an impression of his own feelings?
Nordau’s ideal author—Goethe—has gone further. He wrote a whole novel,
_Werther’s Leiden_, which is little else than a lengthy description of
his hero’s moods.

Another symbolist, Stephane Mallarmé, who in France as well as in
England enjoys a reputation as a poet, or rather as an authority on
poetry, is attacked by Nordau in a manner which suggests other motives
than fair criticism. He gibes at the symbolists and at all who consider
Mallarmé a poet, because he has produced only a few original works and
translations. As our alienist cannot very well put this down as a sign
of degeneration, having treated those who write much as graphomaniacs,
he gives us no other reasons for placing Mallarmé among the examples
of degeneration than that he has “long, pointed, faun-like ears,” a
fact which he seems not to have noticed personally but which he has
obtained, like most of his facts, from a book.

He distinctly insinuates that the admiration for Mallarmé’s poetical
gift indicates degeneration, especially as Mallarmé has written so
little. We meet here again with a striking example of his curious
logic. He imagines that he strengthens his case by quoting from
Lessing, who in _Amelia Galotti_ makes Conti say that Raphael would
have been the greatest genius in painting, even if he had unfortunately
been born without hands. From this, English readers who happen to know
nothing of Lessing or Conti would conclude that either Lessing was
a lunatic or that his character, Conti, was mad. But neither is the
case, and the quotation consequently tells against Nordau. Whoever
would deny that a man cannot be a poet and an authority on poetry
without publishing verse must attach an extremely narrow meaning to
the word poet. If Lessing, or Conti, means by the word painter, not
the craftsman, but the man with the painter’s soul, the symbolist may
surely be allowed to call Mallarmé a poet. Has Nordau never met with
mute poets, blind painters, and deaf musicians? One of the greatest
musicians of the world composed marvellous music while stone-deaf.
Now if we suppose that Beethoven had lost his hearing before he had
mastered the technicalities of music, would he therefore not have
remained a musician?

Nordau is very severe on several other symbolists and certainly does
his best to represent them in an unfavourable light. In order to show
that Charles Morice, the author of _La Littérature de tout à l’heure_
is literally insane and a graphomaniac, he quotes Morice’s rhapsodical
conception of God, which he pretends to take as an exact definition in
order to reduce it to twaddle. To any unprejudiced reader it is evident
that Morice intended to convey by this wild attempt at description how
impossible it is to define God. Nordau’s prejudice against the French
nation becomes palpable when speaking of the fact that the French
language lends itself badly to blank verse and that a freer treatment
of it in French poetry is a comparatively modern departure which by
other countries was taken long ago. He says: “But to any one but a
Frenchman, they merely make themselves ridiculous when they trumpet
their painful hobbling after the nations who are far in front of them,
as an unheard-of discovery of new paths and opening up of new roads
and as an advance inspired by the ideal into the dawn of the future.”
This gratuitous insult of a whole nation gives us a vivid insight into
the working of his mind. He would not have penned a sentence of such
bad taste, and so marked by the echolalia he condemns in others, had he
not been prompted by feelings stronger than his judgment.




CHAPTER VI

_THE LIGHT OF RUSSIA_


With regard to the Russian novelist, Count Leo Tolstoi, Nordau pursues
the same mode of criticism as he employed against other writers. He
also aims at the same object, firstly, to show that authors suffer
from mental aberration; and, secondly, that the public who read their
books do not do so on account of their literary merit, but because the
readers are mentally afflicted in the same way as the authors.

To prove this against Tolstoi and his admirers is no light enterprise,
and Nordau does not acquit himself of his self-imposed task without a
great deal of shuffling.

He allows nothing for Tolstoi’s surroundings, the social condition
of the country in which he lives, and the life he has led, but lifts
him out of all that tends to interpret this ultra-Russian writer, and
regards him as one who has evolved some extraordinary notions in a
studio far from his native land.

He who says Russia says a great deal: for the expression denotes a vast
empire, consisting of many nationalities and races, held together
by a strong pressure, which seems, like the gravitation of huge
heavenly bodies, to be determined by the size of the body from which
it emanates. The inclusion of so many elements does not prevent Russia
from remaining a great and powerful State, provided its Government soon
becomes to some extent rational. The predominant nationality is made up
of genuine Russians, whose characteristics are such as to render them
capable of being, according to their rulers in the immediate future, an
imminent danger to Europe, or a model nation to be followed by the rest
of the world.

The Russian is good-tempered, patient, loyal, generous, kind-hearted,
and superstitiously religious. He is extremely emotional and dangerous
when aroused. His easy-going manners, his immense self-esteem, and his
intense vitality render him an easy victim to the numerous temptations
which aliens are not slow to hold out to him. He is straightforward
and strongly averse to hypocrisy, and when he is convinced that duty
demands from him that he should assist in filling a trench with his
dead body for the artillery to pass over, or to throw a bomb at the
Czar, he will do it without a murmur.

His passiveness, his loyalty, and long-suffering have been cruelly
taken advantage of by a long succession of Governments, chiefly
consisting of aliens. In Russia the most powerful bureaucracy in the
world, composed chiefly of a German element, has taken possession
of the power, and holds to it in a quasi-unconscious fashion, like a
bull-dog unable to relax his hold.

The Government, with such legislation as exists, has gone on for
centuries with scarcely any regard for the well-being of the people,
and the inevitable results are slowly but surely manifesting
themselves, and point to some terrible catastrophe.

The emancipation of the serfs, from which sanguine people, unacquainted
with Russian circumstances, hoped so much, shook the old institutions
to their very foundations, but brought only momentary relief to the
suffering people. The _mir_-eaters, or village usurers, have swallowed
up the land of the peasants, their cattle, and their implements, and
compelled large hordes of people to move about the country in search
of work. Employment is scarce and labour ill paid. The tax-collectors
are as implacable and the Government officials as corrupt as ever.
The tendency—to be observed all over the civilized world—of dividing
humanity into two classes, the wealthy and the poor, has nowhere
developed to the same extent as in Russia. The rich, comparatively
few in number, are becoming extremely rich, but the great mass of the
people miserably poor.

Extreme poverty, intensified by the pressure of the tax-gatherer and
the inhuman methods of the money-lender, has a gnawing effect on a
people living in an intensely rigorous climate, in miserable villages
sparsely scattered over vast monotonous plains.

The Russians being a sentimental people, it is natural that their
forlorn condition should cause them to brood over their sad lives
during the long and lonely winter nights, or that they should be driven
to drown their consciousness in _vodka_.

Such is the stage on which alone a character like Leo Tolstoi can
become intelligible.

But it is not only the powerful influences from external circumstances
which give that direction to Tolstoi’s mind which Nordau insists in
interpreting as a sign of degeneracy. The mode of life and the sphere
of action he has adopted, in pursuance of the large and noble traits
of his character, must have been powerfully conducive to his peculiar
mood and ideas. Nobody who has read his works, even if only those works
Nordau holds to be of the smallest literary merit and fullest of signs
of degeneracy, would ever conceive the idea that Tolstoi’s mind was
weak or distorted. But if this novelist had been driven to lunacy,
it would have been extremely irrational to account for his mental
aberration without considering the outward circumstances that would
have produced it.

Tolstoi’s sympathies were roused, as those of every noble-minded man
would have been roused, by the miserable existence of a people who
possess all the elements of a great nation. In Russia no such ways
are open to the reformer as in free States. There is no Parliament, no
organized political parties, no free Press. A political career is out
of the question, except in the form of a consistent toadying of those
in power, and of a blind obedience to those who crush the people. Any
opposition to Government, or even proffered suggestions, would lead to
exile in Siberia, and abruptly cut short any man’s activity. Tolstoi
had therefore only two courses open to him: either to expatriate
himself and to thunder forth in a foreign Press against the abuses of
the Russian Government, unheard and unheeded by his own censor-ridden
compatriots or to adopt the line of action he did.

In the cities, where the alien element prevails, and where the scum of
the Russian nation congregates, he would be out of contact with his
people. His emotional nature would have revolted against the police
tyranny and spying rampant in the cities, and he would soon have been
landed in the clutches of the authorities. He therefore elected to live
among the peasants as one of them, convinced both by his feelings and
his reason that he would thus directly benefit his surroundings by his
example and form that leaven by which the whole mass might in time be
leavened; while his writings simultaneously appealed to those of his
countrymen who read books, and those who, outside Russia, sympathize
with the Russian people.

We do not pretend to know Tolstoi’s secret thoughts and his ultimate
hopes, but we believe it possible that he may, without being an
irrational enthusiast, or even a dreamer, have reckoned on his writings
and opinions reaching the highest personages in the Russian empire
through being read by all the upper classes of the world. He may have
hoped that, after establishing his reputation throughout the literary
world, and after having become the pride of his own nation, he would
one day dare to speak such words to the rulers of all the Russians as
might save him and his nation.

Whatever may have been his expectations, there can be little doubt that
he has met with dire disappointment, not so much in his personal career
as in his hopes for his fellow-countrymen.

To the framers of paper constitutions and to theoretical
revolutionists, it may seem easy to introduce a new form of Government
and to regenerate a nation, but, to one who, like Tolstoi, is in close
contact with the masses to be regenerated, who has daily experienced
all the frailty of the material he has to work with, who alone tries to
swim against overwhelming currents,—to him, the uplifting of a nation
or a race is a herculean task impossible to approach with the clap-trap
of the modern agitator.

Tolstoi, finding that it is the _morale_ of the people he has to work
upon, that it is in the religious tendencies of his fellow-men that
their strength lies, concludes, with the full consent of his emotional
being, that religious conceptions, different from the Russian orthodox
Church and from the western university theology, must be the foundation
on which he has to build. What therefore is more rational than that he
should plunge into religious speculation, and thus expose himself to
the mistake of adopting religious views which are prompted as much by
the needs of the situation, the circumstances, his own and his people’s
characteristics, as by logical deductions. Greater men than he—Moses,
Mahomet, and others—had done so before him.

Besides, as the postulates he starts from do not spring from exact
knowledge, but from faith and emotion—as all religious postulates
necessarily must do,—and as these, his postulates, are diametrically
opposed to those which Nordau would pre-suppose, Tolstoi’s conclusions
must be the opposite of his; but to differ from Nordau is to be
degenerate.

It is no wonder then that Tolstoi’s books should be more than novels.
He had a higher purpose in view than gathering in royalties and
entertaining his readers. His books are jam with a considerable amount
of powder in them. If, despite this, they have been widely read
throughout the world, ordinary minds would conclude that in creating
them their author has accomplished tasks which alone a mind of a high
order could hope to perform. Our alienist, determined to come to no
such conclusion, supposes that all those who read Tolstoi’s works are
degenerates, and that the large sale of his books is consequently a
confirmation of Tolstoi’s degeneracy.

Would Nordau apply the same kind of reasoning with regard to the sale
of his own works? He would probably; but instead of starting with the
supposition that contemporary readers of books are incipient lunatics,
he would very likely take for granted that the readers who approve of
his works are highly intelligent, and that the great sale they have
attained proves the soundness of his own mind.

In support of his view, Nordau, who fairly acknowledges the great
qualities of Tolstoi as a writer of fiction, has the audacity to
assert that it is not this great quality of his works that has secured
him his world-wide fame, but that it is due to his mysticism, which
a degenerate race prefers to a literary and moral value. The only
semblance of proof he gives for this view is that Tolstoi’s best
works have not contributed to his reputation so much as the _Kreutzer
Sonata_, “an inferior creation, which in the public opinion of the
western nations placed him in the first rank of living authors.” But
who has decided that the _Kreutzer Sonata_ is inferior to Tolstoi’s
other works? Only Nordau, whose opinion runs counter to the “western
nations.” If therefore there is any value in Nordau’s argument it rests
entirely on the astounding fact that the “western nations” are all
degenerate and Nordau alone is sane.

Nordau, like most German bookworms, evidently believes that references
to an authority, however obscure, are enough to prove any assertion. He
has manifestly worked with any number of “conversations-lexicons” and
encyclopedias about him, in quest of some printed confirmation of the
extraordinary opinion that the _Kreutzer Sonata_ is a poor book, and
that the preceding works of Tolstoi alone contain those grand qualities
which Nordau recognises. He finds that Franz Bornmüller, an author of
a biographical dictionary, said in 1882 of Tolstoi: “He possesses no
ordinary talent for fiction, but one devoid of due artistic finish, and
which is influenced by a certain one-sidedness in his views of life and
history.”

It should be noticed that Nordau gives this quotation in order to
show that Tolstoi had not attained any European fame in 1882, that
is, before the _Kreutzer Sonata_ was written; but with that amazing
want of logic characterizing his whole work, he does not see that this
Franz Bornmüller thinks very little of the early works of Tolstoi. He
consequently differs from Nordau, and shows every sign of sharing the
opinion of the “western nations.”

Nordau makes a sharp distinction between Tolstoi’s novels as such
and the philosophy they enforce. He is thereby enabled to give some
plausibility to the sophistical assertion that it is not Tolstoi’s
novels, but his philosophy, which brought him popularity. This
philosophy, which is supposed to prove that Tolstoi’s mind is not
sound, Nordau sums up in the following way: “The individual is nothing,
the species is everything, the individual lives in order to do his
fellow-creatures good; thought and inquiry are great evils; science is
perdition; faith is salvation.” Among these items there is only one
which differs from the views of the bulk of humanity—from that ordinary
common-sense which Nordau so often takes as a standard of sanity, even
in the superstitious peasant. We refer to the item in which he says
that thought and inquiry are great evils. Nowhere in Tolstoi’s writings
can such a nonsensical phrase be found. It is one of those little
touches that Nordau so dexterously applies, or which his prejudice
causes him to apply, in order to strengthen his case in his readers’,
or perhaps in his own, eyes. He appears to ignore such works as _My
Confession_, _My Faith_, _A Short Exposition of the Gospel_, and _About
my Life_, all works built up by elaborate thoughts. The whole life of
Tolstoi has been one of “thought and inquiry,” and all his literary
work is an invitation to think and to inquire. Tolstoi objects only
to such thought and inquiry as vainly attempt to carry the methods of
inductive science into spheres where the observation of our senses
is of no avail, and where their failure tempts us to believe in the
non-existence of that all-important portion of the universe into which
faith alone can penetrate.

That Tolstoi should distrust science, after the presumptuous attitude
which scientists have taken up, will surprise nobody who has read
what we have said about this bankruptcy of science. Many scientists,
including Nordau, have in their gratuitous attacks on religion so
recklessly mixed up scientific fact with scientific speculation, that
they must blame themselves if people use the term “science” when it
would be more correct to employ that of “unscientific speculations.”

That a thinker, who is at the same time the instructor of the ignorant
masses, should look upon faith as a means of salvation, is not new, and
cannot be considered as a sign of mental aberration; for millions of
sane common-sense men have for thousands of years held this opinion.
Even if we apply the word salvation exclusively to society in general,
to the race, or to one nation, leaving out any references to individual
salvation in another world, faith of some kind is the only source from
which it could spring. Scientists of Nordau’s type seem unable to
understand that science means the knowledge of absolute facts which,
while quite capable of undermining and destroying the foundations
on which a more or less primitive religion rests, cannot possibly
come into collision with faith in the widest sense of the term. When
a scientist and a religionist differ about things which have not
come under scientific inquiry—such as the final aim of the scheme of
humanity, for example—the dispute is not between science and faith, but
between two different faiths. Science therefore cannot regulate our
conduct, determine our views, or save a nation. This alone can be done
by faith, be it based on science, on tradition, or emotion. A great
scientific knowledge might be degraded into an excuse for, and a means
of, an irresponsible, selfish, and wicked life; or it might ennoble the
mind, intensify the sense of responsibility, and serve as the means of
rendering great services to humanity. All depends on the faith of the
scientist.

The end of what we may call the era of scientific atheism, now at hand,
presents most deplorable results, as we have already pointed out, of
removing the only foundations of a moral balance available to those who
have not had any opportunity of drawing from scientific studies that
strength of character, and those noble aspirations to be met with in
scientists who have a genuine faith—a faith in their science and in
humanity, if in nothing else. Tolstoi, who, like every thinking man of
our time, had seen the disastrous effects which scientific atheism had
produced, cannot possibly be regarded as of weak intellect because he
rejected scientific superstition and proclaimed faith as the true basis
of conduct and character.

Nordau finds traces of degeneracy in Tolstoi’s question, “Wherefore
am I alive?” and in the manner in which Tolstoi finds a reply to that
question. It seems however that Nordau too has asked, himself that
question, for in his book _Degeneration_ (page 149) he replies to it
in a close, well-reasoned, passage, which deserves to be read to its
full extent. We shall quote only a part of it in order to compare the
reply he himself obtains with the reply obtained, by Tolstoi. After
having shown that the aim of a man’s life is necessarily involved in
the greater question—the aim of the universe—and that such an aim
cannot exist objectively in time or space, he says: “But if it is not
objective, if it does not exist in time and space, it must, in order
to be conceivable, exist somewhere, virtually, as idea, as a plan
and design. But that which contains a design, a thought, a plan, we
name consciousness; and consciousness that can conceive a plan of the
universe, and for its realization designedly uses the forces of nature,
is synonymous, with God. If a man however believes in a God, he loses
at once the right to raise the question, ‘Wherefore am I alive?’ since
it is in that case an insolent presumption, an effort of small, weak
man to look over God’s shoulder, to spy out God’s plan, to aspire to
the height of omniscience. But neither is it in such a case necessary,
since a God without the highest wisdom cannot be conceived; and if
He has devised a plan for the world, this is certain to be perfect,
all its parts are in harmony, and the aim to which every co-operator,
from the smallest to the greatest, will devote himself is the best
conceivable. Thus man can live in complete rest and confidence in the
impulses and forces implanted in him by God, because he, in every case,
fulfils a high and worthy destiny by co-operating in a, to him, unknown
Divine plan of the world.”

We here notice his words: “that which contains a design, a thought,
a plan, we name consciousness.” Now, nobody knows better than the
scientists that so far all scientific discovery has revealed plan,
method, and purpose, in the smallest thing and the smallest phenomena
in the universe. Is it then necessary to be degenerate to believe in
a self-conscious Providence? John Stuart Mill observes that the fact
that we find in nature, especially in human and animal bodies, physical
and mechanical problems solved in the same way as engineers had solved
them long before they knew of such solutions in nature, points not only
to the existence of an intelligent Creator, but to a similarity of His
intelligence to that of human beings.

According to the passage from Nordau, then, the planning in nature
proves a conscious force, a conscious force is synonymous with God, and
the man who believes in God can live in complete rest in his faith.
Tolstoi obtained a reply to his question in a manner which he describes
in the following words:

“It was quite the same to me whether Jesus was God or not God; whether
the Holy Ghost proceeded from the one or the other. It was likely
neither necessary nor important for me to know how, when, and by whom
the Gospels, or any one of the parables were composed, and whether
they could be ascribed to Christ or not. What to me was important was
that the light which for eighteen hundred years was the light of the
world is that light still; but what name was to be given to the source
of this light, or what were its component parts, and by whom it was
lighted, was quite indifferent to me.”

The difference in the two replies is one of words only. If therefore
Nordau acknowledged that a sensible man could ask such a question, and
if the reply of Nordau we have just quoted is recognised by him as his
own opinion, he and Tolstoi would stand very much in the same category.
But Nordau does not think that a perfectly sane mind would ask such
a question; and if it was asked, he has another reply. This reply is
however far from being so clear as the other. “If,” he says, “on the
other hand, there is no belief in a God, it is also impossible to form
a conception of the aim, for then the aim existing in consciousness
only as an idea, in the absence of a universal consciousness, has no
locus for existence; there is no place for it in nature.” From this it
ought to follow that, if a man does not believe in God, there is no
God, and consequently there can be no aim. He then proceeds to argue
that, if there be no aim, it is useless to ask the question, “Wherefore
am I alive?” but that we can ask the question, “Why do we live?”
His reply to this is characteristic: “We live in obedience to the
mechanical law of causality, which requires no plan and no universal
consciousness.”

It is curious to behold how Nordau cannot perceive that his question,
“Why do we live?” implies the question, “Whence the mechanical law of
causality?” and that his reply is simply, “We live because we live.”
Once he has accepted this self-delusion as a solid foundation, his
reasoning again becomes rational, and does not bear on the point before
us. The most astounding part of it is that Nordau considers Tolstoi,
and all others whose instinct, whose emotion, and whose immutable
reasoning point to a cause behind Nordau’s home-made mechanical law of
causality, as thereby showing signs of mental degeneration.

Nordau, in order to prove the confusion existing in Tolstoi’s ideas,
seems to take for granted that the tendency towards Pantheism,
perceptible in the Russian’s reasoning, is utterly at variance with
Christianity. We would simply point out that Tolstoi has his own
Christianity, framed on his own interpretation of the Gospels, and not
any previously existing Christianity, and is therefore at liberty to
proclaim a creed which has a Pantheistic tendency without exposing
himself to the reproach of being inconsequent. But we consider it more
important to notice the fact that the Gospels, far from laying down any
dogmas, are the record of the life of a man—divine or not divine—whose
mission it was to protest against dogmas. He called God “Father,” in
order to speak of universal consciousness only in its relations to man,
leaving it to the doctrinaires and the philosophers to agree as best
they could on the question of Pantheism or no Pantheism. Besides, the
Gospels certainly emphasize the omnipresence of the Creator; and if
this Pantheistic tendency had not existed among the disciples, it is
not likely that St. Paul would have said, “In Him we live, we move, and
have our being.”

The shallow, superficial manner in which Nordau treats Tolstoi’s
ethics is certainly unworthy of him, and amounts simply to a quibble.
These ethics, correctly summed up, “Resist not evil, judge not, kill
not,” which correspond precisely with the teachings of Christ, Nordau
does not regard as ethics, but proceeds solemnly to test them as
expediencies in peculiar cases, and comes to the conclusion that they
are ridiculous.

Must we then conclude that Nordau has no such ethics, but that he
believes it right to return evil for evil,—_vendetta_ fashion,—that
he objects to suffer wrong for a good cause, and that he revels in
indiscriminate murder? Tolstoi’s ethics, as ethics should do, hold
up the ideal for which we should strive, and as a practical test of
them we must consider not the murder and plunder of one good man by
a bad one, but the state which would ensue if all men conformed to
them. The practical moral we ought to draw from them is not that laws
and law courts should be abolished, but that laws should be framed
and law courts should be managed in such a way as to favour a general
acceptance of such ethics. Here again Nordau indulges in illogical
reasoning, and in contradictions of himself. He takes for granted
that humanity is so utterly depraved that if “the fear of the gallows
did not prevent it, throat-cutting and stealing would be the most
generally adopted trade.” This means that Nordau in one place in his
book declares human beings are too good, too noble, too honest to need
any belief in a hell, but in another place declares that they are far
too depraved to do without the fear of the gallows. He forgets that
good ethics have sprung from the good instincts of our race, and that
crime has largely been fostered by bad laws, bad law courts, and bad
institutions.

In one of his stories, entitled _From the Diary of Nechljudow_,
Tolstoi’s hero, Prince Nechljudow, is a most eccentric character,
created probably for the purpose of showing the absurdity of
indiscriminate charity and other impulsive actions of the erratics of
our day. Nordau gives an account of one of the instances in which the
Prince’s selfish way of practising charity is forcibly brought out.
He evidently does this in order that the Prince’s action should be
accepted as an illustration of what Tolstoi means by charity. This is
both absurd and unjust. It amounts to an identification of the author
with the character he represents—a way of insinuating degeneracy in
authors who simply hold it up in their characters as a warning. To thus
mix up authors with their characters is a mistake frequently committed
by unintelligent readers, but it is surprising to find that with Nordau
it is an habitual method.

With regard to the character Pozdnyscheff, Nordau does the same thing.
He takes for granted that the opinions expressed by this character are
those of the author. The passages he extracts from _Short Expositions_,
in which Tolstoi’s own opinions are expressed, in no wise justify such
a supposition.

Nordau’s explanation of the enormous success Tolstoi’s books have
achieved is that it is due to general degeneration among the upper
classes throughout the world. If he could personally meet the hundreds
of thousands of English people who have read Tolstoi’s works, he would
be able to form an idea of the immensity of his mistake. He would find
that the majority of these people belong to a middle class, consisting
of persons who are not overworked and who indulge in none of the vices
of the continental aristocracies. Their muscles and their nerves have
been strengthened and fortified by a healthy education, and by a love
of bodily exercise, sport and even danger, and by a moral life. They
live in a country where the authorities have found that to proscribe
any licentious book is to promote its sale, and where consequently
there is hardly any check upon morbid literature. Yet there is not a
country where less of it is circulated than in England. It is true
that these readers of Tolstoi have not attained to that height of
intellectual development which would permit them to accept Nordau’s
“mechanical causality” as a satisfying explanation of the universe;
but, on the other hand, it would be difficult to find a people so
religiously inclined, and yet so free from superstition and fanaticism.

Some of them may like Rossetti’s pictures, and many of them Burne
Jones’s, but as a rule they have an equal admiration for Raphael,
Tintoretto, Correggio, and others. They cannot be classed among the
mystics on that account. As few of them write books, they cannot be
called graphomaniacs. Nor do they show any signs of being egomaniacs.
Nor have they any physical stigmata of degenerates. The heads of this
class are generally beautifully shaped, and the ears of the women
are by all foreigners who visit this country proclaimed to be the
finest and daintiest ears in the world. Personal beauty among this
class is decidedly on the increase; for each generation seems to be
better-looking, and the youngest is generally the most beautiful. The
latter fact, we may mention, is no doubt due to the increasing tendency
of the upper and middle classes in England to beautify their homes and
to surround themselves with exquisite objects, as well as to a more
intellectual education, pastimes, pleasures, and arts.

Why then must these readers of Tolstoi’s works be classed as degenerate?

It is not denied that in England there are people who exhibit signs
of mental degeneration, but they are to be found more in literary
and political circles than in the close ranks of the upper and
middle classes. We would not undertake to class them under the
headings established by the alienist, and it would be difficult even
for Nordau to do so. Perhaps they are not sufficiently advanced in
degeneracy to be so classed. Such signs as they exhibit are some of
them as old as the hills, and others are clearly the manifestations
of that intellectual and moral daze which generally follows on the
destruction of the religious foundations of belief involved in the
acceptance of belief in scientific atheism. But the most prevalent
form of degeneracy is that which is palpably the result of financial
depression, felt not only in financial but artistic and literary
circles. For reasons which we leave to the economists to explain,
England’s commerce and agriculture seem to have come to a dead-lock.
The result seems to be diminished incomes all round. Many artists,
_littérateurs_, and politicians are at their wits’ end how to make
an income, and there can be little doubt that this has fostered a
certain amount of demoralization. Extraordinary attempts are made
to produce sensational pictures, to write eccentric poetry, to send
forth books that will shock, and to treat of risky subjects on the
stage. Politicians are obliged to make politics a profession, and, as
popularity is indispensable to it as a profitable profession, they
worship majorities. Any one who is acquainted with London cannot doubt
for a moment that these forms of demoralization spring entirely from
a necessity of making a living. Artists, authors, and politicians
of this class are no more inclined to lunacy than the vast class of
people who do distasteful work, as well as those who have to appear
before the public in dangerous but not much esteemed performances. If
the financial depression is destined to disappear, there can be little
doubt that the majority of these signs of demoralization will also
disappear.

There are in this country, as everywhere else, real degenerates, people
who have weakened their brains and moral faculties by drink, debauch,
overwork, or persons who have inherited mental debility. There are
also among us, we regret to say, an alarming number of destitute people
who have been driven into mental derangement by those terrible pangs
that misery inflicts. But all these degenerates care as little for
Tolstoi’s novels as they do for Rossetti’s or Burne Jones’s pictures.

Though English circumstances are vastly different from continental,
there can be no doubt that the causes which have rendered Tolstoi’s
novels popular are the same here as in other countries. The scientific
atheists have introduced into literature a materialist, selfish,
sceptical, pessimistic, and cynical tone which was tolerated by the
public for a long time. On the continent they had Zola and his wretched
imitators, whose books found their way among us, while England has
produced a crop of neurotic storytellers, playwrights, and versifiers,
made up for the most part of masculine women and effeminate men, who
have exploited to the utmost the atheistic vein.

The noble spirit which atheism was to bring to the front somehow did
not take to literature, and the reading classes of the world began to
miss those pure joys which reading used to afford them. The books of
the day offended their religious feelings, their sense of decency,
their loftiest conceptions of the world, and their self-esteem, without
amusing them. The whole literature of fiction had become stilted, and
the morbid and pessimistic authors departed so widely from nature
and evinced so many signs of utter insincerity that the reading world
longed to be face to face with a man who spoke his innermost thoughts.
The world was therefore ready for a new departure in literature.

What wonder then that Tolstoi’s works were well received. They bore
witness to consummate ability, a close study of human nature. They
presented a true picture of social Russia. They afforded an insight
into the Russian mind. His readers experienced the intellectual treat
offered by few books,—that of feeling the presence of a master-mind,
and of following the thoughts of a thoroughly sincere writer, free from
the cheap ready-made materialist philosophy—a man who devotes both his
life and his work, with almost superhuman energy, to the regeneration
of his race.




CHAPTER VII

_THE REAL IBSEN_


In reading Nordau’s chapter on Ibsen, one cannot help wondering why
our alienist has given his book the form he has. The feeling which
the preceding contents of his work have more or less inspired—that
there is a discrepancy between the apparent plan of the work and its
execution—almost ripens into conviction on the perusal of his chapter
on Ibsen.

He says in his dedication to Professor Lombroso: “Now I have undertaken
the work of investigating the tendencies of the fashion in art and
literature, of proving that they have their source in the degeneracy
of their authors, and that the enthusiasm of their admirers is for
manifestations of more or less pronounced moral insanity, imbecility,
and dementia.” He also says that he “ventures to fill a void in your
[Lombroso’s] powerful system.” From what he says higher up on the same
page about the power of books and works of art to influence the masses,
and his many hints in other parts of the book, as, for example, in its
concluding pages, we must understand that his great object is to do
what he can to arrest the downward movement of human intelligence.

He thus assumes that there is a degenerating process going on
throughout civilization, but attentive readers of his book feel the
whole time that this assumption, far from being proved to be correct,
rests on data supplied by Nordau, which strongly warn his readers to
accept them only with a grain of salt.

On the other hand, there are a host of indications in all civilized
countries pointing to an increase in intellectual power, moral
strength, and æsthetic refinement. Some of these indications would
probably not be undervalued by Nordau himself: the rapid progress of
science, the increasing education among the masses, the large number of
newspapers and periodicals dealing intelligently with various branches
of knowledge, professions, and trades, the wider application of
scientific methods to industry, wonderful inventions, not the outcome
of discovery, but of intelligent induction, the decay of superstition,
love of investigation, etc. Nordau, having allowed that the test of
a sound mind is its ability to attend rationally to one’s business,
ought to recognize that the growth of intellectual power is manifest in
improved business methods, skill, manufacturing, complicated and daring
financial schemes, ingenious co-operative systems, well-managed and
disciplined trades’-unions, nay, even cleverly laid plots to defraud.

An increasing moral strength is proved by the growth of the altruistic
feeling, the devotion with which the cause of humanity, morality, and
progress is served by people who, thanks to scientific scepticism,
expect no reward in another world; the greater sincerity observable in
all religious bodies, the magnitude of charitable institutions, the
magnificent heroism displayed by captains and crews on sinking ships,
by our life-boat men in attempting to save the shipwrecked, by our
colliers’ efforts to rescue the victims of explosions, etc. The great
victories of the Germans over the French and the complete success
of the commanders’ daring tactics have been largely, and probably
correctly, ascribed to the moral qualities of the German army, while
the utter defeat of the French cannot be ascribed to the want of moral
qualities, but to bad leadership. A quarter of a century has elapsed
since the Franco-German war, but there is no reason to believe that the
moral qualities of the German army have degenerated. That no degeneracy
has taken place in the English, French, and Italian armies has been
proved by the Chitral expedition, by the French war with Madagascar,
and by the Italian operations in Africa.

If, despite these manifest signs of growing intellectual power and
moral strength, Nordau’s deep insight into psychological matters
has revealed to him a mental degeneracy in the civilized world, his
way of investigating such decay, his mode of dealing with it, and
especially the causes he attributes to it, are too vacillating, too
contradictory, and too biassed to inspire confidence. While sometimes,
as in his chapter entitled “Etiology,” he refers to such causes as
the increase in the consumption of spirits and tobacco, the factory
system, overwork, overcrowding—all causes palpable to all who have
given any attention to social questions,—in the rest of his book he
seems to regard certain popular writers and artists as the great
cause of general degeneration who should be specially noticed. This
contradiction cannot be explained away on the plea that his book is
only part of a wider investigation which has already been made, or
might be made, regarding the causes of degeneration, and that, so long
as his work is intended to treat of the influence of literature and
art, his ignoring of other causes is legitimate. If an effect is first
attributed to one cause and then to another, we may be sure that there
is something wrong with the reasoning. We cannot prove first that
the tendency to hysteria, so common in people engaged in a certain
class of business, is due to overwork, and afterwards prove that the
same tendency in the same people is due to Rossetti’s pictures or to
Swinburne’s poems.

Nordau never furnishes an explanation of the enormous importance
he attaches to the influence of writers and artists, and the small
importance he attaches to the more palpable causes of degeneration,
of the existence of some of which he is aware. Nor does he tell us
how he reconciles the two facts, alternately insisted upon by him,
that degeneration in artists is the cause of degeneration in their
surroundings; and again, that the degeneration of their surroundings is
the cause of degeneration in artists and authors.

If such artists and authors as Nordau believes to be degenerate are
the effect of degeneration all round, they are surely the smallest and
least deplorable results, and it was certainly not worth while to write
so bulky a volume about them. Nordau mentions about a score; and what
is a score compared to the mass of humanity, or to the five hundred
million people included in western civilization? A degeneration that
would not have other results than that of producing twenty degenerate
men, who, though they are in many respects a source of enjoyment to
many, may have a grain of insanity in their brains, would not be worth
noticing. If, on the other hand, these supposed degenerates are not
what, to the ordinary mind, they decidedly appear to be—the children of
their time—but the actual causes of such serious psychological effects
which statistics seem to reveal, we are face to face with a phenomenon
which surely demanded a different method of investigation.

The real connection between the causes and the effects should have been
ascertained. For instance, the most alarming feature of degeneration
in England—that weak-mindedness which leads to drunkenness—should
have been connected with the mystical painters and poets, and should
have been proved not to have been the result of those causes which
seem palpable to every man. Then the influence of individuals on the
masses in general should have been ascertained. History offers a wide
field for such an investigation. If it had been found that authors
and artists exercise less influence than other individuals, such as
sovereigns, statesmen, prophets, reformers, revolutionary leaders,
discoverers, explorers, and others, the influence of these should have
at first been studied, and what could not be attributed to them might
have been laid at the door of artists and authors.

In examining history, old and new, we are struck with the extremely
slight effects which have been produced by _littérateurs_ and
artists, and the enormous, all-powerful influence exercised by other
individuals. Books have influenced books, poets have influenced
poets, painters have influenced painters, but the political, social,
intellectual, moral, and æsthetical development of a nation has over
and over again been completely determined by men who have been neither
artists nor authors.

In modern times the same fact is palpable. Has ever the world been
influenced more than by such men as Cavour, Prince Bismarck, Mr.
Gladstone, Napoleon III.? and how might not the fate of humanity
be determined in the near future by such men as, for example, the
Emperor of Germany and the Czar of Russia? On the mental qualities
of the Emperor of Germany depends largely whether Germany is to be
crushed under the army system; whether it is to be ruined by financial
blunderings; whether there shall be peaceful development of its
resources, or war to the knife between its classes; whether healthy
reforms shall gradually clear away its social anomalies, or whether a
revolution of unprecedented atrocity shall uproot its very foundations;
whether its inhabitants shall develop those characteristics to which
peace and happiness are conducive, or those which would inevitably be
fostered if Germany were made the battle-field of modern armies.

On the mental qualities of the Czar depend directly the destiny of a
hundred million people, and indirectly the peace of the world. Russia
is only too willing to progress under an imperial leader. On the
occasion of his accession to the throne and his marriage, millions
of people anxiously scanned his portrait and tried to read in his
features the fate of Europe. The presence of lines supposed to indicate
weak character produced prophecies of clerical domination, opposition
to progress, and death to Russia; while a kindly expression of the
eyes inspired many with hopes of a new era for Tolstoi’s unfortunate
countrymen.

It is not only personages of high rank and sovereign power whose mental
state is of utmost importance to humanity. The political situation
in most countries is capable of producing at any moment a man who,
without being either an author or an artist, might be able to change
the destiny of nations. It is not the opportunity that is wanting,
it is the men. France is panting for a man. The working classes in
America and in England stand in need of a good leader. In Germany
Liebknecht threatens to divide the power with the Emperor. A political
Tolstoi might, at the head of the Russian people, sweep the recreant
bureaucrats from his Fatherland.

It is then sovereigns, politicians, and popular leaders whose
mental state is of the utmost importance, and whose influence may
overwhelmingly determine the mental and moral development of humanity.
An answer to the question whether they are degenerates, or whether
they are of mentally or morally sound mind, is momentous to the whole
civilized world, especially if it be admitted that the minds of the
race are so susceptible of being moulded by the minds of influential
men.

But who are the men whom Nordau blames for the degeneracy for which
he finds the proof in statistics? Poets and artists, whose very names
are known only to the educated classes, and who for the most part
supply what the market demands, or simply reflect the society around
them. The most surprising of all is that he himself denies any power
or any talent in some of these men, calling them—to omit his worse
epithets—such names as drivelling idiots, weak-minded graphomaniacs,
etc.

One condition seems however necessary before a man can receive the
compliment of being called names by Nordau—he must have attracted
public attention. We have therefore said, and repeat it, that his
desperate attempt to make out Ibsen to be a degenerate renders it
impossible to form a clear idea of his object, or of his reasons, for
the methods he has adopted.

Henrik Ibsen aims not at being a prophet, a teacher, or a regenerator
of mankind either by literary or scientific methods. No one can
detect in his works special ethics, or particular religious or social
views. It is characteristic of his pieces—and according to many of
his opponents a great fault in them—that he points no moral, that the
questions involved remain at the end of the piece exactly where they
were at the beginning, that his heroes and heroines are no heroes and
no heroines, and cannot serve as models of conduct. His opponents and
admirers alike complain that they cannot get at his meaning, and that
he will not explain himself. It is therefore surprising that there
should be so much talk about the influence he exercises, and that
Nordau himself should speak about “Ibsen’s dogmas,” “Ibsen’s code of
morals,” and about Ibsen himself as a “reformer.”

Those who speak about Ibsen’s influence on the ethics of our time
cannot, as a rule, give any explanation of their meaning which can
justify the importance they attach to it. They are apt to point to
his influence on the English drama and blame him for certain of its
objectionable features. But to those who understand his pieces it is
perfectly clear that he has not been followed by English dramatists in
such things as have made him famous and popular. They have contented
themselves with imitating certain situations and with referring to some
objectionable feature in modern society, which Ibsen does reluctantly,
compelled to do so by the situation, and in order to emphasize types of
character which are only too common in every civilized country, but are
so closely draped in hypocrisy as to require the great dramatist’s lens
to show them up. His imitators however exemplify entirely exceptional
cases and conjure up characters the prototypes of which it would be
extremely hard to find. He aims at presenting stern reality; they aim
at producing risky situations. Indeed, his imitators cannot be said to
have been influenced by him more than has his brilliant parodist, Mr.
F. Anstey.

In Germany, as in the Scandinavian countries, complaints are sometimes
raised against Ibsen’s influence on women, especially young women.
Our daughters are getting Ibsenized, is the cry raised by a number of
Philistine parents. It is perhaps natural that Ibsen’s influence on
women in those countries, where the staging of Ibsen’s pieces recalls
more familiar presentations should be greater than in England, where
the Norwegian manner of life is but little known. But too much weight
might easily be attached to the difference in acquaintance with Norway.
There is a far more powerful reason why Ibsen’s so-called influence
should appear to be more marked on German and Norwegian women than on
English women.

With the exception of the United States, there is no country in the
world where respectable women are better treated than in England. An
old adage says, with a great deal of truth, that the wife of the German
is his slave, the wife of the Frenchman is his mistress, and the wife
of the Englishman is the queen of his house. The German woman certainly
has of old held a position in her home which might well lead her to
envy the English woman, and as the Scandinavian countries have been
largely affected by Germany in their social manners and habits, the
women of these countries have ample cause for dissatisfaction. Since
the time of Frederika Bremer, a woman’s revolt has been brewing in
the Scandinavian countries, and the aspirations for more liberty, a
more natural life, and more happiness have been constantly becoming
stronger, and were highly developed before Ibsen’s first piece
appeared. Besides, the spread of English fiction in Germany and in the
northern countries of Europe has shown the women of those countries
that a happier life is quite possible.

The road to the realization of such aspirations was however barred by
custom and the selfish view of the question taken by the men. They
had no objection to high-spirited, talented, well-dressed, and lively
women, whose attractions could evoke in them romantic and ardent
feelings; and a great many knew well enough that leisure, exemption
from hard work, good food, plenty of exercise, suitable friends,
artistic surroundings, good books, a fair amount of pleasure, and
considerate treatment were required to transform a young woman into
that feminine ideal which they worshipped in their imagination. But
they repudiated entirely the idea of having such ideals in their wives.
It would have clashed far too much with the traditional type of a good
wife, and to marry one deviating from this type would have set the
whole circle of acquaintances talking. Besides, a wife conforming to
the ideal was considered an expensive luxury, leading to waste of money
which could be much better employed.

Mothers of girls, well acquainted with the marriage market,
consequently exerted all their energy to form their daughters for
the positions they were expected to occupy. House-cleaning, washing,
cooking, darning, etc.,—this was what they had to learn. A demure
demeanour was what they had to practise. The society of men was what
they had to avoid. Romantic ideas had, above all, to be suppressed,
and only such love as would come after marriage, or at least after
betrothal, was considered legitimate and decent.

A great feature in their education was to closely observe the evils and
troubles which followed upon poverty, and how much more comfortable
life would be with a prosperous though unattractive husband than with a
beloved man who might not succeed in the world. The idea of refusing a
proposal of marriage from a well-to-do man, however old and prosy, was
regarded as preposterous, and any respectable girl dreaming of such a
thing would have been considered as a romantic, ungrateful hussy.

As the men seldom married young, the girls were taught to ask no
questions about their past, and were trained to sacrifice all their
ideals of purity, their dreams of love, what a free woman would call
her self-respect, their future happiness, their healthful youth, on the
altar of Philistine respectability.

There are other ways of degrading women besides yoking them with an
ox to a plough, and that they were degraded and de-naturalized the
thinking German and Scandinavian women had felt long before Ibsen
wrote plays. The struggle for better treatment was however extremely
weak and the progress towards emancipation extremely slow. Just
as oppressive government, with its police persecution, gags open
discontent and drives the forces of revolt under ground, so the tyranny
over the German and Scandinavian women—when tradition and prejudice
prevented open manifestations—developed in the hearts of women,
especially among the most gifted, a dangerously strong spirit of revolt.

Already at the time when Ibsen began to write there were numerous
but isolated outbreaks. The old treatment, which generally resulted
in turning the married woman into a dull, despondent house-slave, a
soured invalid, a nagging scold, or a gossiping zany, began to produce
scoffing Aspasias, neurotic adventuresses, and here and there avenging
furies.

This tendency to revolt among the women was stronger in Norway than in
the other countries, because it developed parallel with that ethical
awakening—the new _Aand_[1]—which during the latter part of this
century has taken possession of so many Norwegian minds; also because
the strongly imaginative and contemplative character of the Norwegian
people, and the intensely emotional nature of their women, led them
to brood over their wrongs in a thoroughly Norwegian fashion. Better
education and wide reading tended in the same direction.

    [Footnote 1: _Aand_, the Norwegian for spirit, inspiration.]

Ibsen has therefore not Ibsenized the Scandinavian ladies. He has
simply seized upon a social phenomenon and, understanding its gravity,
has held it up to his contemporaries for a study and a warning.

Nordau, having committed the egregious mistake of believing that Ibsen
has invented whereas he has in reality only copied, and that a social
phenomenon which is natural to intellectual and moral progress is a
result of Ibsen’s writings, is, in his capacity of the most German of
Germans, naturally wroth with Ibsen for representing as a social evil
what a normal sound-minded common-sense German—the very type of the
non-degenerate—would consider as a useful and comfortable arrangement.
There are several excuses for Nordau’s belief that Ibsen misrepresents
reality. The improvement in woman’s status in society has no doubt
advanced more in Germany than in the Scandinavian countries. It is
possible that the Dowager Empress’s influence as an Englishwoman has
not been so great as is generally supposed, but there can be little
doubt that English novels, from Charlotte Bronté’s _Jane Eyre_ upwards,
have considerably furthered justice towards German women. The close
business connections between Germany and England, the numerous Germans
who have had a long experience of English life, have no doubt done much
to spread English social views in Germany.

The German women may therefore now have less cause for discontent and
revolt than the Scandinavian women, and it is excusable if the Germans
consider that they treat them fairly and well.

To observing Englishmen who visit Germany it is however clear that the
whole Philistine idea of the housewife is still prevailing in that
country. A great number of husbands consider it a distinct advantage
to be able to throw off all restraint in their own homes and to compel
their wives to accommodate themselves as well as they can to their
whims, their habits, their indulgences. That exasperating type, the
house-tyrant, which is found in all countries, and not seldom in
England, is especially prevalent in Germany.

German men are well aware that their wives have nothing in common
with the fascinating ideal woman of their imagination, and they are
quite satisfied that it should be so. Their work, their studies, their
profession, or their business demands all their attention, and they
could not dream of dismissing them from their minds when they enter
their homes. A woman who would distract her husband’s attention from
such important subjects would be an impediment to his success, while
the typical housewife, by her cares and ministrations, furthers it.
Like most men, Germans have chivalrous leanings, and enjoy a courteous
intercourse with ladies, but it is generally not their wives who reap
the advantages of this taste. It is the other ladies, those they
meet in society, and not seldom do they muster all their powers of
gallantry, all their means of pleasing, and all their faculty to amuse
in the company of women of light character, often in every respect
inferior to their wives.

It is those German women who feel that their happiness and their
lives have been sacrificed, not for their husbands, but to a vicious
conception of married life, who sympathize with the women of Ibsen, and
have thus contributed largely to the fame of that dramatist in Germany.

Ibsen has not Ibsenized the German ladies, but his pieces have revealed
the existence of a grudge long harboured by German women.

It is only just to record that, though Englishwomen, especially those
who live and are treated up to the English ideal, as we mentioned
before, live under much happier circumstances as children, girls,
_fiancées_, and wives, there are many of our countrywomen whose
marriages have been a cruel disillusion. Many Englishmen marry too
young, before they know their own minds, and under the feverish
impulse of a first love. When such young husbands are thoughtless,
selfish, or when they have made a bad choice, a miserable married
life is the result. In a great number of young households happiness
prevails, thanks to the strong-mindedness and tact of the young wife,
who can take care of herself and of her husband also. But thousands of
marriages turn out utter failures, not for want of love, but from the
husband’s utter ignorance of how to take care of his wife’s health,
beauty, and happiness.

Though it is the fashion in this country not to adapt but to translate
literally Ibsen’s pieces, there would be no difficulty to so adapt them
as to render them exact representations of the state of many an English
home. And this is sufficient to explain his fame in England. Here,
as on the continent, it is the selfish, mean, bullying husbands who
cannot find any sense in Ibsen’s pieces, and who are extremely shocked
at what they consider Ibsen’s perversion in attempting to enlist, by
inexplicable devices, the sympathies of the audience for the erring
wife, when these should be vouchsafed to the husband, who appears to be
such a respectable, common-sense man.

When Ibsen thus calls attention to the importance and the gravity of
the feeling of revolt which has long rankled in the minds of thinking
women all over the world, and which manifested itself long before
Ibsen’s pieces were known outside Norway, he cannot fairly be said
to be responsible for the growing discontent. In reality, he has
rendered the world a great service: for the new views and aspirations
of modern educated women can neither be suppressed nor ignored without
considerable danger to society.

In order to understand that the demand for the purification of
marriage is not a transitory whim, it will suffice to consider who
made the marriage laws, and, what is more important, who inaugurated
the traditional views concerning them. Men alone did. Not the young
men, who would be largely swayed by the yearning for true love and
by chivalrous considerations, but the law-makers of old; that is to
say, elderly men of influence and fortune. In the olden times, when
the foundations of social customs were laid, the rights of women
were considerably less respected than in our days; and under such
circumstances the law-makers did not feel called upon to consider woman
to any large extent, but made laws and introduced customs which suited
themselves. What they wanted was, firstly, to marry young and beautiful
wives, despite all objections that might be raised against their
age, their looks, or their characters, and without much troublesome
courtship; and, secondly, to keep their young wives in subjection by
sheer force and legal compulsion.

It is not reasonable to suppose that the fair sex should submit for
ever to such treatment, and, as the women in the English-speaking
countries have already gained large concessions, it is natural that
their sisters in the rest of the civilized world should struggle for
reform.

It is therefore difficult to see why Nordau should consider Ibsen’s
influence so dangerous to society as to deem it necessary to hold him
up as a degenerate. The enigma becomes more puzzling when we find that
Nordau frankly allows that Ibsen has great merits and great talents.
He says, for instance: “Henrik Ibsen is a poet of great verve and
power.” “He has the gift of depicting in an exceptionally lifelike
and impressive manner that which has excited his feelings.” “He has
the capacity for imagining situations in which the characters are
forced to turn inside out their inmost nature, in which abstract ideas
transform themselves into deeds, and moods of opinion and of feeling,
imperceptible to the senses but potent as causes, are made patent to
sight and hearing in attitudes and gestures, in the play of feature,
and in words.” “He knows how to group events into living frescoes
possessing the charm of significant pictures... not like Wagner, with
strange costumes and properties, architectural splendour, mechanical
magic, gods and fabulous beasts, but with penetrating vision into the
background of souls and the conditions of humanity.... But he does not
allow the imagination of the spectator to run riot in mere spectacles;
he forces them into moods, he binds them by his spell in circles of
ideas, through the pictures which he unrolls before them.” “The power
with which Ibsen, in a few rapid strokes, sketches a situation, an
emotion, a dim-lit depth of the soul, is very much higher than his
skill, so much extolled, of foreshortening in time... Each of the terse
words which suffice him has something of the nature of a peep-hole,
through which limitless vistas are obtained. The plays of all peoples
of all ages have few situations at once so perfectly simple and so
irresistibly affecting.”

Further on he again says: “It must be acknowledged that Ibsen has
created some characters possessing a truth to life and a completeness
such as are not to be met with in any poet since Shakespeare... None
the less no poet since the illustrious Spanish master (Cervantes) has
succeeded in creating such an embodiment of plain, jolly, healthy
common-sense, of practical tact without anxiety as to things eternal,
and of honest fulfilment of all proximate, obvious duties without a
suspicion of higher moral obligations, as this Gina.... Hjalmar also
is a perfect creation, in which Ibsen has not once succumbed to the
cogent temptation to exaggerate, but has exercised most entrancingly
that ‘self-restraint’ in every word which, as Goethe says, ‘reveals the
master.’”

We have quoted somewhat lengthily from this eulogy of Ibsen in order
to render justice both to him and to Nordau. There is no passage in
Nordau’s book which displays more insight into dramatic art and a more
intelligent appreciation of some of the subtle but marvellous merits of
Ibsen’s plays. We should not have thought it possible that so keen an
appreciation could have been formed without seeing Ibsen’s pieces acted
in the original language. This eulogy becomes all the more valuable
when we remember that it emanates from one of Ibsen’s opponents—from
a man who would fain restrain Ibsen from writing at all, and who
evidently has not paid any attention to the slow but important social
struggle which Ibsen so frequently illustrates.

Most people who have read these and other acknowledgments on the part
of Nordau of Ibsen’s talent, will be struck with the reckless manner
in which Nordau defeats his own object. He wishes to warn the world
against “degenerates” of Ibsen’s type, and at the same time praises him
as few writers have been praised, seemingly without considering that in
this manner he inspires thousands of young writers with the ambition to
be degenerates as Ibsen is.

To the average reader Nordau suggests the idea of the impossibility
of reconciling so much power, genius, talent, and craftsmanship with
decayed mental faculties. This all the more as Ibsen’s pieces are
financial successes, and he consequently shows a solid capacity for
the management of his own affairs, which, as Nordau has already told
us, and every alienist would tell us, is the safest test of a sound
brain. The conclusion seems inevitable that Nordau is either utterly
wrong when he sees all these merits in Ibsen’s work, or else when he
considers him to be degenerate.

In examining the grounds on which Nordau strives to establish his
theory of degeneracy we shall no doubt find that the latter alternative
is the true one.

Nordau first impeaches Ibsen’s reputation for realism, but takes
this term in its most literal sense. The stage has its limitations,
and the dramatist must have a certain licence in the creating of
his situations. Ibsen is not called a realist because all that he
represents on the stage is in closer conformity with reality than the
representations of practically any other dramatist ever were, but
because his characters, besides being individually true to nature, are
types—strongly coloured types, it may be, but not too strongly coloured
to be understood by an average audience. In a piece not intended to be
played the characters may be more delicately moulded, but when they
are to be grasped in a few flashes before the footlights they must,
like the statue intended for an elevated position, be hewn in bold
proportions.

In order to show how unreal Ibsen is, Nordau asks whether it is
probable that the joiner, Engstrand (in _Ghosts_), wishing to open
a tavern for sailors, should call upon his own daughter to be the
odalisque of his “establishment.” By using the word “odalisque,” and
by placing the word “establishment” between inverted commas, he gives
a distorted idea of the tavern Engstrand is going to open. It is a
question of a real tavern, not of an “establishment.” Girls in similar
taverns in Norway are of course exposed to temptations and sometimes to
insults, but they are by no means necessarily unchaste. In selecting
the employment in the tavern, Ibsen succeeds in giving an insight into
the Philistine character of Engstrand, who for the sake of money would
risk his daughter’s reputation, but who could always fall back on the
excuse that he did not intend to ruin her.

Nordau may be right when he says that no Paris doctor would have told
Oswald Alving in _Ghosts_ that he had softening of the brain. But Ibsen
does not say “softening of the brain”; he makes Alving say “a kind
of softening of the brain,” an expression which might very well be
Oswald’s interpretation of what the doctor had told him in very guarded
words. Moreover it is not as an alienist that Ibsen has gained his
fame; it is as a dramatist.

Nordau quotes as another example of unreality, the sense in which the
term “society” is used by the characters in the _Pillars of Society_.
This is an error into which Nordau has evidently been led by reading
a bad German translation of the piece. Ibsen’s characters do not
mean “social edifice,” as Nordau pedantically will have it, but the
well-to-do people in the community.

Again, he thinks that excuse very unreal which Berneck gives to his
foreman, whom he has not taken into his confidence. But this unreality
is precisely what Ibsen wishes the public to see, and he has evidently
not accentuated the unreality sufficiently, as this has escaped even
Nordau. Nordau does not find the speech of Pastor Rörlund realistic
enough. The fact is that the speech is a delightful parody, in no way
exaggerated, of those addresses which toadying sycophants all the world
over are in the habit of delivering to a magnate whom they desire to
propitiate. Any one who has heard such a speech in Norway will be
amusedly surprised by its comic realism.

It would be tiresome to go minutely into the proofs of unreality
Nordau finds in Ibsen’s pieces, and the bare mention of the following
examples will suffice to show the futility of his attempt. He considers
it impossible for a man of forty-three to inspire love, and this in
Norway, where people develop and ripen so slowly. He thinks it unreal
for an excitable girl to describe as a storm on the sea the passion
which induces her to encourage her rival’s suicide, and then when
the rival is out of the way patiently to devote a year and a half
to gaining the love for which her sin was committed. Our alienist,
who displays throughout his book an utter lack of the sense of the
ridiculous, finds the scene between Ellida, Wangel, and the Stranger
in _The Lady from the Sea_ ridiculous, a scene which thousands of
audiences have followed in breathless silence and with deep emotion.

The puzzle is why Nordau is so anxious to show that Ibsen is not a
realist, and how his not being a realist can possibly be construed into
an argument in favour of his insanity. Are then all the people who, as
a matter of taste or as a matter of business, supply the public with
unrealistic dramas to be considered more or less demented? If this is
the case, what becomes of the mental sanity of Nordau’s great model,
Goethe, the author of the intensely unreal _Faust_?

Referring to the theory of heredity, frequently alluded to in Ibsen’s
works, Nordau says he cannot preserve his gravity when Ibsen displays
his scientific or medical knowledge. Here again we are tempted to refer
to the sandal-maker and the sandal-strings; but there is actually no
occasion to do so, because Ibsen displaying his medical knowledge is a
picture conjured up by Nordau’s own imagination. We do not know what
Ibsen does in his private life, but in his dramatic works he does not
display his medical knowledge. What suits Nordau’s purpose to give
as Ibsen’s opinions are the opinions of his characters, who, being
true to nature, speak as their prototypes in reality speak. It suits
Ibsen’s dramatic purposes to make use of certain views on heredity,
and he is all the more entitled to do so as such opinions are very
prevalent nowadays, and not without exercising a considerable influence
on people’s minds. Ibsen may have exactly the same opinion as his
characters give expression to, or he may think the very opposite,
but those who thoroughly understand Ibsen’s method will be convinced
that he would not commit the mistake, so common among dramatists, of
allowing his characters to reflect the author’s personality. When
Regina, in _Ghosts_, in reply to Mrs. Alving, who is harping on
heredity, says, “What must be, must be... I take after my mother I dare
say,” she does not express Ibsen’s opinion about heredity, but that
fatalistic notion which is unfortunately extremely common among women,
especially when in trouble or at fault, and a reference to her mother
is only a confirmation of her fatalistic belief, at which she clutches
that she may rid herself of her responsibility.

If we must look for a tendency in Ibsen’s works, it might be found in
his attempt to show up this generally prevailing weakness in will and
character which Nordau himself finds everywhere and which he calls
degeneration. Regina, as well as Oswald, are “frightful examples” of
this weakness, and in placing them on the stage Ibsen has the same
object as Nordau, namely, to exhibit a deplorable defect in modern
society. Ibsen may therefore be looked upon as Nordau’s co-operator,
and even precursor, because Ibsen’s characters are types of that very
degeneration which Nordau desires to combat. In fact, the importance
that our alienist attaches to Ibsen’s characters suggests the idea
that if there were no Ibsen there would be no Nordau. By the aid of an
extremely confused and distorted reasoning, he condemns Ibsen for that
very weakness which he, like Nordau, has discovered in modern society
and incarnated in his characters as a warning to his contemporaries.

If we had not a strong objection to the _tu quoque_ argument, and were
not resolved to avoid it, we could here say a great deal about Nordau’s
condemnation of Ibsen’s supposed illogical references to heredity,
while Nordau himself yields to the temptation of using the absurdest
logic in order to discover supposed proofs in favour of his own pet
theories.

Even supposing that Ibsen did believe in heredity, is he not in harmony
with his time? One does not require to be an alienist or a biologist
to understand that the Darwinian theory of evolution is the theory of
heredity; and one does not require to be very old to have observed
that the characteristics of parents often repeat themselves in their
children. In his criticism of Ibsen, Nordau seems to go too far when
he casts discredit on the theory of heredity, with regard to which he
himself goes to an extreme when he attributes to heredity the lurking
belief in a personal God in the inmost recesses of the consciousness of
certain scientists. The manner in which he refers to little Hedwig’s
blindness will certainly induce his readers to infer that he himself
does not believe in cases of hereditary blindness—an affliction
which has however come within the knowledge of many. Nordau, in his
purposeless eagerness to tear Ibsen down from his pedestal, seems to
imagine that he would further his object if he could show that Ibsen
is influenced by the religion of his childhood, of his youth, and of
his country. To be influenced by such religion has been the case with
many sane people of strong mind, especially in countries where the
morality implanted in young children is based entirely on religious
instruction. Even when a man ceases to believe literally all that has
been taught him, it is natural that his religious thoughts should mould
themselves on the early impressions, which then become symbols instead
of fact. This is especially natural with people whose walk in life has
precluded them from giving that absorbing attention to psychology and
biology which to a sound mind is indispensable before it can master,
or believe, the scientists’ theories of “mechanical causality,” and
the annihilation of the conscious _Ego_. Nordau, like many other
scientific enthusiasts, seems to labour under the impression that all
the loud-voiced people, who affect complete irreligiosity, and who pose
as free-thinkers, are really convinced that the scientific discovery
of yesterday, which might be upset by the discovery of to-morrow,
sufficiently explains the world and themselves. This is far from being
the case. How often when we scratch the atheist do we not find the
superstitiously devout. How many men could be found in the world who
are so capable of satisfying all their curiosity regarding the unknown
by scientific theories that they might be quoted in support of the
artificiality of religious instincts? They would certainly number very
few. And yet scientists of Nordau’s stamp are apt to regard such men as
the only really sane ones, and the rest of humanity as to some extent
degenerate.

But how does Nordau know anything about Ibsen’s religious opinions? He
simply studies the characters in Ibsen’s pieces and takes for granted
that Ibsen must necessarily hold the same opinions as his characters.
This absurd assumption, indispensable to his purpose, leads him
sometimes into ridiculous dilemmas from which he escapes in a not less
ridiculous manner. When he finds that Ibsen has _dramatis personæ_ of
diametrically opposed opinions and beliefs, he does not know which
of them represents Ibsen’s opinions and Ibsen’s beliefs. Determined
not to notice the simple fact that none of them represent Ibsen’s
views, he falls back on the expediency of declaring that, because his
characters differ, Ibsen does not know his own mind, a fact which in
our alienist’s view points to degeneracy.

He quotes copiously from Ibsen’s pieces in order to show that those
characters who have committed evil deeds, without having resigned
themselves to being utterly bad, yearn for confession. From this
we must conclude that Nordau considers a longing for confession in
those who have sinned as an obsession and as pertaining to stigmata
of degeneration. To make capital out of this, Nordau sticks hard to
his assumption that Ibsen’s object is to preach some kind of creed by
proclaiming his own opinions through his characters. Few people in the
world really know what Ibsen’s final object and real aims are; but his
immediate object, it will be granted, is to show his contemporaries
what they really are, and so sternly and so cogently does he pursue
this object that, while other dramatists show their spectators the
defects of others, Ibsen lays bare their own.

In showing sinners’ yearnings for confession, Ibsen could not therefore
be wrong unless a longing for confession in sinners is unreal or
unusual. Far from being unusual, we find it in almost every human
being, from the innocent child down to the brutal criminal. The police
and law-court reports in England frequently relate cases in which
men and women confess crimes which would never have been discovered,
simply to satisfy a conscience yearning for confession. We have nothing
to do here with the question as to whether this first step towards a
better life is longed for in obedience to an instinct implanted in the
emotional nature of man by a Creator, or whether it is the consequence
of an inherited tendency originated by religious teaching and moral
civil laws. We have only to deal with the fact that the conscience of
all evil-doers, and especially of those who are willing to abandon
evil and return to good, prompts them to confess. Nordau has only to
consult a Catholic priest in order to learn how strong and general this
yearning is.

It must also be remembered that confession, if not to priests yet to
God, is part of the Lutheran creed prevailing in Norway, and that
consequently confession is regarded by the people as the test of
true repentance. Though auricular confession is not a sacrament in
the Lutheran Church, the Norwegian ministers could tell Nordau how
often sinners and criminals ease their consciences by confessing to
them. It is hardly possible to write a serious dramatic piece without
representing a struggle between good and evil. And how then could Ibsen
write dramas true to Norwegian life, without instancing that yearning
for confession which is the outward sign of the inward struggle between
good and evil?

Nordau instances the French assassin Avinain, who before being
guillotined gave out as his life’s motto “Never confess,” as an example
of a strong and healthy mind—or, at least, he regards this motto as one
which only a strong and healthy mind can follow. On the other hand, he
regards confessing men as men “in whom the mechanism of inhibition is
always disordered, and who therefore cannot escape from the impulse to
confess when anything of an absorbing or exciting character exists in
their consciousness.”

In this comparison Nordau omits the chief factor—the religious opinion,
or the philosophy which necessarily determines whether the confession
is a sign of strength or weakness. If the murderer Avinain was a
confirmed atheist, and if his emotional nature was such as to glorify
murder, then he had no impulse to confess, and consequently required no
strength of mind to resist confession. If the man who glories in what
is good—or, to use an expression of Nordau’s, who has social instincts,
and consequently believes that confession is his duty and an heroic
action—should shun the ordeal and prefer to spend the rest of his life
as a self-despising hypocrite, this would be weak-mindedness. Of course
Nordau may always argue that to believe in the good and in personal
responsibility is in itself a sign of degeneration. But this would be
simply to place the question on another plane, where we have already
discussed it.

What is said here about confession applies equally to what Nordau says
about redemption. It is not, as he states, an obsession of Ibsen’s, but
a symbol very natural to a people of strong religious feelings. His
characters could not possibly express their ideas and their emotions
in any other way than that in which they have been in the habit of
thinking all their lives.

Nordau cannot rid himself of the obsession that the dramatist must
necessarily take a side in the squabble between religion and science,
and between the devotees of different social panaceas, and seems
exasperated because he cannot get at Ibsen’s real opinion on such
questions. When he persists in his egregious error of taking the
opinions of Ibsen’s characters as those of Ibsen, his mind gets into
a maze, which leads him to the conclusion that it is Ibsen’s mind,
not his own, that has got into a confused state. It is very common to
find a man, who, by dint of study or by natural talent, has become an
authority on one subject, so far losing his power of self-criticism as
to believe himself a universal genius, capable of dogmatizing on every
subject under the sun. It is this conceit that induces successful
men to imagine that their natural specialty is not that one which has
rendered them famous, but some other specialty for which in reality
they have no aptitude whatever. A successful comedian believes himself
to be hardly dealt with because he is not acknowledged as a tragedian.
A musician considers himself an authority on the drama. The poet thinks
he ought to have been a politician. Biologists imagine they would shine
as social reformers.

It is because Ibsen has not yielded to this weakness, because he has
not the conceit to lay down the law on questions outside his own
province, but simply aspires to be a dramatist, that Nordau complains
so bitterly of Ibsen’s omission to express a distinct opinion on all
sorts of subjects on which Nordau burns to break a lance with him. He
tilts against the opinions expressed by Ibsen’s characters with the
wasted fury of Don Quixote attacking windmills.

We are at a loss to account for the contradictions of which Nordau
appears to be guilty. Much of what he says in the latter part of his
essay on Ibsen is in direct contradiction to what he says in the
earlier part, where his praise of Ibsen’s talents and abilities is
conspicuous. We will give an example of what we mean. He says at the
beginning of his chapter: “Each of the terse words which suffice him
[Ibsen] has something of the nature of a peep-hole, through which
limitless vistas are obtained.” Towards the end of it he says: “Thus
Ibsen’s drama is like a kaleidoscope in a sixpenny bazaar. When one
looks through the peep-hole, one sees at each shaking of the cardboard
tube new and parti-coloured combinations. Children are amused at this
toy, but adults know that it contains only splinters of coloured glass,
always the same, inserted haphazard and united into mystical figures by
three bits of looking-glass, and they soon tire of the expressionless
arabesque.”

Can this contradiction be the result of his great trust in authorities,
and has he made use of two that clash, or does he write for writing’s
sake, differently each day according to the mood he happens to be in?

When Ibsen’s characters give expression to their yearnings for greater
personal liberty, for a revolt against social traditions which threaten
to wreck their lives, and which they have beheld wrecking the lives of
hundreds around them, they are intended by the dramatist to show what
is going on in modern society. Nordau of course concludes that Ibsen is
an egomaniac who resents any bonds on his worst instincts. Supposing
that Ibsen shares personally that same longing for more individual
freedom which Nordau so warmly deprecates, it is evident that they
differ simply because Nordau starts from the supposition that men’s
instincts are necessarily bad, and Ibsen from the supposition that they
are good.

The fundamental difference in opinion mainly springs from the different
circumstances amongst which the two men have been born and brought up.
The German, who has all his life been impressed with the necessity of
officialism and police government, who has lived under the impression
that his castle would be attacked by a lower caste when free to follow
its inclinations, would naturally attach great importance to existing
institutions. If he at the same time be illogical enough to sap at the
root of that great order-producing institution—religion—and beholds
that this safeguard is becoming more and more unreliable, he naturally
looks for something to take its place.

The German social system, so unjust to the working classes, has
naturally embittered the people and enlisted a number of working men
into the revolutionary parties, and this growing army of so-called
enemies to society naturally alarms the German middle-class man and
prejudices him against the proletariat. Passions and destructive
instincts, instilled by long suffering, he is apt to regard as human
nature from which the worst must be expected. This explains many
of Nordau’s contradictions. He wishes to abolish religion because
its abolition would glorify science, but he wishes to retain the
marriage laws because he fears that without them an unspeakable state
of immorality would ensue. He denies a divine plan in creation which
might account for the moral instinct in man, but he does not believe
that morality has sprung from the only remaining source, namely, man’s
experience of the advantages of morality. His habit of bowing to
authorities causes him to believe that morality and a pure family life
are the result of the marriage laws, and not that the marriage laws are
the result of man’s love of morality and of a pure family life.

The Norwegian is born and brought up in a country where liberty has
been the basis and safeguard of moral order; where few police are found
in the cities, and where, throughout vast tracts of country, man’s good
instincts are the only police; where the peasant and working classes
have no desire or intention to attack the wealthy; where the people
are religious because they are honest and not honest because they
are religious; where self-esteem and justice would take the place of
religion were it to crumble. The Norwegian has noticed that the poor
are more generous than the rich, that the people are more honest than
their officials, that the free man and woman are more moral than the
tied ones, and that liberty elevates and oppressive laws degrade. If
the Norwegian seems to attach little importance to legal marriage, it
is because, in cleansing it from mercenary considerations and other low
motives, he hopes to base it on such foundations as moral instinct,
love, self-respect, honour, and possibly on religious belief, and
thereby make it a life-long reality. It is not to gratify low instincts
and licentious passions, as Nordau would have it, that he wishes for
reform. He may be mistaken in his motives, but this is no excuse for
attributing vile motives to him.

Nordau is not the only one who is puzzled by the many peculiarities
of Ibsen’s plays. Like him, many English theatre-goers wonder why
his best types and his leading characters, as a rule, are so void of
nobility, fine feeling, and high principles; why he always places his
scenes in small towns, and not among the romantically wild country
and the picturesque peasants, as Björnsen and Jonas Lie have often
done; why he represents the so-called respectable and official classes
in so unfavourable a light; why his women seem to be morally and
intellectually superior to his men.

In order to elucidate these questions and many other peculiarities
in Ibsen’s plays and characters, as well as some of the reasons why
a German critic should disapprove of Ibsen, it should be remembered
that in Norway two cultures have met and struggled—the German and
Scandinavian—but have not blended.

Of the Scandinavian nations, the Norwegians may be considered as the
extreme type. While they differ from the Danes and Swedes considerably,
they differ still more from the Germans. Their characteristics arise
not only from race, but largely from surroundings and modes of life.
The genuine Norwegian people have of old lived scattered over a vast
area of country, separated by high fjelds and broad fjords, foaming
torrents and dense woods, only sparingly communicating with each other,
and still less with strangers, and hearing little of the outside world,
they have grown into a silent, thinking, and deep-feeling nation.
They have inherited from the old Viking times an unquenchable love of
liberty, and all their institutions, their customs, their principles,
have developed in freedom, and such virtues as they have and of
which they are most proud, are the outcome of personal independence.
Accustomed to personal danger on the snow-clad mountain-paths, in the
vast forests, and in small open boats upon the stormy fjords, they
have acquired an extraordinary degree of self-reliance. Unused to,
and distrustful of, foreign ways, and seldom successful in foreign
countries, they harbour an intense love of Norway and for anything
Norwegian; and while they may conceitedly think that everything that
is Norwegian is great and noble, they certainly endeavour to put a
stamp of nobility and greatness on everything that is Norwegian. They
are proud, generous, loyal, hospitable, and can never be persuaded
that lowly circumstances or poverty could possibly be an excuse for an
unroyal conduct.

Born and bred amid snow-capped mountains, deep valleys, perpendicular
rocks, a jagged, stormy coast—the whole wearing an air of solemn
and lonely grandeur—the Norwegians are a meditative and highly
imaginative people. The stirring natural phenomena peculiar to the
country cannot fail to stimulate their imagination. The snow-storms,
the ice-avalanches, the light summer nights, the brilliant moonlight
diffused over the abrupt mountains, the dark forests and the glittering
fjords, the raging storms from the Atlantic, the flaming midnight
winter skies, the sunsets which so wondrously illumine the whole
coast-line—such scenes, such pictures, sink into their minds and
quicken their emotions.

What wonder, then, if they are full of folk-lore and the supernatural
has for them an irresistible charm? They are superstitious, and believe
that their actions and lives are influenced by gnomes, fairies, and
trolls. Old heathen ceremonies for the propitiation of the spirits are
still in vogue. They are deeply moved by music and poetry, and have a
strong predilection for all that is heroic and great.

It is not surprising that in German translations of Norwegian
writings—for which Nordau blames Ibsen’s degeneracy—adjectives should
have taken a new meaning; for in Norway they have been influenced by
nature’s grandeur. When Norwegians say “great,” they mean great as the
fjeld, great as the boundless ocean; when they say “silent,” they mean
silent as the wood in the short summer night. Consequently, when a
man, an action, a thing, is described to them, they are apt to measure
it by the standard of nature’s extremes around them. They are always
disappointed when they behold the wonders of civilization described to
them as great and wonderful. They would call the ruins of the Coliseum
mean, and think no more of the pyramids than of ant-hills. Their ideas
of a great man could probably never be realized, and their wonder is
considerable at finding the mighty lords of England so unlike demi-gods.

It was the Hanseatic League that brought this stern and haughty people
into contact with German culture. This remarkable federation of
enterprising German merchants discovered that profits could be made out
of the rough products of Norway, and they founded a German colony in
Bergen, which rose to considerable importance. German traders gradually
settled in all the other important Norwegian centres, and the whole
commercial life of Norway became more or less Germanized.

At the time Germany was far ahead of Norway in everything appertaining
to industry, and was already then bent on doing business with foreign
countries by offering them a mass of German manufactured goods of
attractive appearance, but of little value, and not indispensable
to a people like the Norwegians. Competition was already severe in
Germany, money had acquired an immense importance, success in life
was most easily attained by intense application to business, saving,
and grinding. The German traders stood in the same relation to the
Norwegians as that in which English traders stand to the native races
whom they first approach for business purposes. The traders and agents
who went as far as Norway—a long distance before the days of steamers
and railways—were daring and reckless men, bent upon making money,
just as the pioneers of British commerce were and are in Africa. What
interested them was not the great and noble aspect of the Norwegian
character, but the desire on the part of these people to buy gewgaws,
and the facility with which they parted with their money and their
goods.

Though Norway is a poor country, it yielded to the not over-ambitious
Germans a satisfactory harvest, and a great number of them settled
permanently in the Norwegian towns. They became sufficiently numerous
and influential to impress a German stamp on Norwegian urban life, on
the people who worked and lived with them; and these became Germanized
to no small extent.

These middle-class Germans were no doubt excellent, respectable people
in their way, but they had little in common with the Norwegian country
folk. They were better educated, they had more worldly wisdom, their
experience in their own cities had trained them to subject their
emotional nature to their intellect. In order to push on to success in
their German communities, where antagonistic and powerful magnates left
but little scope for daring and straightforwardness, they had learned
to value diplomacy and discretion.

They had no sympathies with the natives, whom they regarded as
semi-barbarians, and all their intercourse with them was diplomatic and
insincere, and their sole motive was profit. The honesty, the pride,
the generosity of the Norwegian peasantry were well known to them, but
they took advantage of these characteristics, which they regarded as
expensive luxuries.

The cities however became the seats of the educational establishments,
and the Norwegian youth who were intended for the professions came to
the cities and mingled there with the German element. On the other
hand, the sons of the citizens went into the country in professional
capacities and created there a middle class strongly impregnated with
German culture. In this manner a sharp line of demarcation arose
between the upper and middle classes on the one hand and the peasantry
on the other, the former being strongly influenced by German culture,
the latter clinging tenaciously to the Norwegian.

It is no slur on the German character and German culture to say that it
involved degeneration in no small degree. It partook of the drawbacks
of our civilization, and what happened in Norway has happened in every
country where modern civilization has come into contact with nations
whose virtues and noble qualities have rested as much on ignorance and
the absence of temptation as on inborn worth. Thanks to the historical
development we have indicated, the Norwegian upper and middle
classes, as well as the whole of the urban populations, developed
characteristics which drew upon them the contempt of the peasants.
Their eagerness for profit, their love of money, their indifference
to the great, the noble, and the beautiful, their cringing attitude
towards authorities and towards the wealthy, their sacrifice of public
interests to private welfare, their susceptibility to the influence of
foreign fashion, manners, and vices,—all this tended to lower the upper
and middle classes in the eyes of the peasants.

When the phenomenon witnessed in all civilized countries—the
impoverishment of the masses—made its appearance, public-spirited
men began to inquire as to the causes. It was in the middle of this
century, when a spirit of revolution and reform was abroad, that the
yearning for a better state of things began to manifest itself. There
were no aristocracy, no established Church, and no privileged class to
blame for the unsatisfactory state of the country, and consequently
the investigators turned their attention to the ethical condition of
the people themselves. Comparison between the olden and the modern
times was instituted. The discrepancy between the two classes became
striking, and the corrupting influences were traced to the towns. A
strong desire to revive and strengthen the old culture took possession
of many men and women, who, though educated, had a keen sympathy with
the peasants. To found the future development of Norway on the basis of
the old Norwegian culture became the object of a new national party,
including some of the best elements of the Norwegian nation. These
enthusiasts found their expression in composers like Tjerulf, and in
the writings of men like Björnstjerne Björnsen, Jonas Lie, and Ibsen.

The greatest mistake of these writers—the one that has entirely escaped
Nordau—is their belief that a nation can realize its best aspirations
by methods that have utterly failed in the celestial empire of China.
The hope of preserving the grand feature of the old Norwegian culture
by exclusiveness, by isolating Norway, and by offering a stubborn
resistance to foreign influence, be it good or bad—in this they
have set themselves an impossible task. A thorough national life and
development produced by such artificial means would, even if attended
by the highest degree of success, partake of a theatrical nature. The
more it succeeded, the more it would attract foreigners, and features
which in olden times sprang from the character of the people and from
natural circumstances, would fall into the line of carnivals organized
at the expense of the municipalities and of railways to Alpine summits.

These Norwegian enthusiasts have yet to learn that though foreign
tourists, foreign literature, and foreign art place temptations in the
way of their single-minded nation, there are in every country large
numbers of people who fight for progress as sedulously as themselves,
and whose co-operation would outweigh the dangers of European
modernity. In the old culture, in the past life of nations, especially
in nations like Norway, there are great virtues and noble features
which may well serve as a goal. But to again render them a reality, to
base them on lasting foundations, a people must pass through the fiery
trials of modern temptations, and, instead of yielding plastically to
outward circumstances, must shape their destiny through sheer strength
of character. What Norway has of good and noble she should give to
other nations, and freely accept their best from them. This is an
exchange which, like mercy, blesses both giver and receiver.

Though the struggle against degeneration is, in Norway, hampered by the
national prejudices of the leaders, it is still progressing. Ibsen’s
mission in the fight is to ruthlessly expose the stagnant pools of
corruption. He finds them in the cities and among the middle class,
where the old German Philistine features have been most distinctly
preserved. Many of his characters bear German names, and those who
take the part of the traditional villain wear often the garb of that
respectable, common-sense, matter-of-fact, self-absorbed German whom
Nordau would exempt from any stigma of degeneration.

Thorvald Helmer, in _The Doll’s House_, has, or would have, the
sympathies of millions, not in Germany alone, but in England and
everywhere, of people whose emotional nature, whose love for the high
and noble, has been compressed by that worldly wisdom which in our
large crowded cities becomes prudence, and to obey which is often a
duty—people who are not aware that it is not only possible, but even
easy, to be both diplomatic and discreet in obedience to noble emotions
and exalted aspirations, and that to root these out of our nature is
degeneration.

Helmer, in his sleek reasonableness, is an excellent type of meanness,
and his character is brought out in a consummately artistic way. It
exasperates Nordau that this man, who comes so near his standard of
sound-mindedness, should inspire in audiences all the world over,
especially in the female element, a sense of aversion, apparently
without any effort on the part of the author. Helmer has a keen eye
for the main chance. His reputation and his position have his first
consideration. He trembles at the idea of fighting the world without
them. His love of his wife is the quintessence of selfishness. He
loves her in the two only ways which Nordau thinks reasonable in a
human being, as a companion, as a pleasant thing to toy with; and as
the female of his race, at such periods when he, as the normal man of
Nordau, is actuated by animal impulses—for example, under the influence
of champagne. Of the pure love for a woman which in a man’s heart
remains as a spring of living water, giving him a pang of joy each
time his thoughts revert to her, and which casts a rosy tint of poetry
over life, nay even over death—of such love Helmer is as incapable as
Nordau’s normal man.

Nora yearns for the higher, nobler love, and her lack of experience in
character-study has left her in doubt, though in hope, regarding her
husband. The moment comes when she gains certitude; and when Helmer
reveals himself in his Philistine hideousness, her spirit revolts.

Though of course exaggerated for the sake of dramatic effect, she
is a good type of an intelligent and emotional Norwegian woman.
Norwegian girls receive a great deal of instruction, and as they have
no professions to prepare for, their education is more literary and
artistic than that of the men. They read voraciously the Norwegian
modern writers, and sympathize consequently more than the men with
the extreme nationalists. They are often strongly possessed by the
_Aand_—that indefinable yearning for all that is great and noble—in
Norwegian culture already alluded to. They have a fair knowledge of
foreign literature, and read a great many English novels. With their
admiration for English pure love, for English home life, grafted on the
grand aspirations which the new _Aand_ fosters, they may well appear
uncanny and troll-like to the prosaic German.

We trust that the struggle between the Norwegian and the German
cultures, of which we have endeavoured to give an idea, will make it
easier for students of Ibsen to understand his characters. It is in
_The Doll’s House_ where the two inimical cultures are most clearly
personified, the old Norwegian culture being represented by the
uncompromising, impulsive, and intense Nora, and the imported German
culture by the pedantic, commonplace, and animal Helmer.

If our interpretation is right, it is impossible that Ibsen’s work
could in any way indicate degeneration. It ought, on the contrary,
to be evident that his pieces, rendering objective as they do
the struggle for a higher and better life, based not on pedantic
considerations of immediate and unworthy advantages, but on the noble
impulses of a strong and healthy nation, are at once a summons to rise
higher, and signals pointing the way.




CHAPTER VIII

_RICHARD WAGNER_


We all have met with people who, without being degenerates to any
great extent repeat stories of their own invention so persistently,
that they end by believing in them. In this kind of folly, if folly
it be, there is a great deal of method when indulged in by people
who are anxious, for some reason or another, that their views should
_nolens volens_ be accepted by others. When one comes to deal with the
intellectual development of a nation or a race, and wishes to prove
certain forms of progress or retrogression, it is half the battle
to bring your opponent to believe in the existence of some special,
well-defined psychological phenomenon or social tendency, and to give
it a high-sounding name. What would astrology have been without the
horoscope, or alchemy without the philosopher’s stone? What would
modern statecraft be without such terms as “foreign competition” and
“international jealousy”? What would German socialism be without the
term “revolutionary socialism”? What would bi-metallism be without
the phrase, “the stability of the currency”? And what would Nordau’s
theory of degeneration be without the “mystic movement”?

He takes for granted that there is such a thing as mysticism, as well
as that it constitutes a movement, and then endeavours to explain
everything as partaking of or resulting from it. According to him,
Wagnerism is the reappearance in Germany of that romanticism which
originated there, and afterwards travelled through France and England.
It reappeared, according to him, through Wagner’s degeneration, and
spread in virtue of the degeneration of his contemporaries. He says
that he finds in Wagner a greater abundance of degeneration than in
all the other degenerates put together. “The stigmata of his morbid
condition,” he says, “are united in him in the most complete and most
luxuriant development.”

This is a bold assertion, and will appear bolder yet to any one who
has read his chapter in _The Richard Wagner Cult_. Wagner’s dislike
of the Jews, which Nordau calls anti-semitism, and his views on
social questions, which our alienist calls Anarchism, are pointed
out as unfailing stigmata of degeneration. One of the methods of our
alienist is to notice and make much of certain extreme opinions in
people who are actually made, or who have made themselves, intensely
objectionable, and then to point out that similar opinions and ideas
are present in the mind of some celebrity, and then to draw the
conclusion that this celebrity must be on the road to madness. Either
he does not see himself, or he trusts his readers will not see, that
by such methods every man in the world might be proved to some extent
deranged. He forgets that exaggerated virtues become vices, and that
some of the most prominent men in the world have had idiosyncrasies
to which they have even given considerable play without at all coming
within the range of degeneration.

The anti-semitism in Germany, which Nordau ascribes to
degeneration—probably with the approval of the majority of Jews—in that
country, as well as in Russia, France, and the United States, springs
from causes so patent, that no man who aspires to be considered an
acute observer of his time should ignore them.

Let us instance Russia first—a country where the latest wave of
anti-semitism first took a violent form. Can any one who is acquainted
with the typical financial history of the Russian villages wonder
that the Jews in Russia should be looked upon as a scourge? What has
happened in thousands of such villages is this. An energetic, clever
Jew settles amongst the Russian _moujiks_, who combine thriftlessness
and love of an easy life with many of the good qualities and innocence
of primitive races. The Jew is bent on making money, and caring little
about the opinion the community may form of him, and too brave to fear
their enmity, he has no hesitation in taking up any kind of business,
however unpopular it may render him. He willingly becomes a publican,
a pawnbroker, a land-grabber, and, in combination with other Jews, a
speculator and cornerer. His attention to business, his self-denial,
his hardheartedness to his customers, his knowledge of the tricks of
trades and finance, the ready support he gets from his co-religionists
in other districts in carrying out his purposes, however derogatory
they may be to the community—all this soon renders him the master of
the situation. The stranger, who at first in such a friendly spirit
invited his customer to drink his _vodka_ and borrow his money, is soon
transformed into a harsh tyrant who, by hook or by crook, came into
possession of all the belongings of the villagers, and calmly makes
use of their destitution to extort from them their future earnings.
The Jews, as a rule, on the one hand, and the Russians on the other,
form diametrically opposite views on this social phenomenon. The Jews
say, and Nordau evidently sides with them, that this successful village
tyrant has done nothing to deserve blame. He has only been more frugal,
more thrifty, and more intelligent than the Russians, who were bound by
their inferior character to go to the wall; and that if Russia hates
the Jews, it is with that hatred against successful men common in
human failures.

The ruined Russian peasants simply know that the Jew who came among
them is rich and they are poor, that what used to be their possessions
form his wealth, and that the means he has used to obtain it would not
have been used by them under any circumstances. They think they have
been robbed, and that they and their descendants would be robbed by
the Jew and his descendants if they cannot be freed from him. Hence
anti-semitism in Russia.

Nordau has no right to call the anti-semitists degenerate, even
though they be wrong in their logic, because he is wrong himself, and
he cannot point to ruined homes and wrecked lives as a substantial
foundation for his opinion.

In Germany the Jews play the same part, though under modified
conditions. Though bad, German laws and German officialism are better
than those of Russia, and the German people do not so easily fall a
prey to the strong-minded Jew. But, on the other hand, the Jews make
themselves obnoxious in other ways, both in Germany and Austria. Here
they act everywhere as trade-spoilers. The Jew undersells everybody. He
stops short of nothing, save breaking the law, to extend his business.
He is obsequious to those in power and in wealth, but relentlessly
hard to competitors and to creditors. Many of them will take the
greatest possible advantage of other people’s, especially Christians’,
misfortunes, and will gain their end by deliberately wounding other
people’s feelings. It is the Jews who generally pay the lowest wages,
and who are found in the ranks of the sweaters.

We hasten to state that there are in Germany a great many exceptions to
the types here referred to. But either they are not numerous enough, or
the Jew must possess some inability to show his better qualities, for
no one acquainted with the circumstances in Germany would deny that the
Jew-haters there look upon their enemies in exactly the light we have
described.

But this is not all. Accusations are levelled against the Jews which
are partly untrue, or else vastly exaggerated, and those who make them
should be called upon to prove their statements. Whether they may be
able to do this or not, the fact remains that the Jew-hating Germans
believe that the Jews have formed one vast conspiracy, the object of
which is to secure for the Jews large advantages at the expense of the
Christians. It is alleged that the methods employed are as follows: The
Jews are supposed to meet in secret conclave, in which those of them
who desire to accomplish any special aim state it to their brethren,
who then combine in assisting them. Such aims may be the possession
of a house or a shop in the hands of a Christian, the ruin of some
obnoxious competitor, the miscarriage of some public auction of goods
coveted by some Jew, and so on. With such ideas prevailing, how is it
possible to ascribe Jew hatred to degeneracy? Such logic is all the
more surprising as it remains a palpable fact that the fortunes of the
Jewish houses are growing apace, that Jews seem to succeed no matter
what they undertake, that they certainly are more charitable to their
co-religionists than to Christians, and for that matter than Christians
are to Christians, while at the same time poverty and misery are on the
increase among the Christian masses.

Nordau does a bad service to the Jews of Germany when he attempts
to lay the blame for anti-semitism exclusively at the door of the
Christians and calls them degenerates, while he entirely exempts the
Jews. This partiality, coupled with his contempt for the masses and his
belief in government by the more strong-minded men, points to a future
state in Germany in which the Jews should be the ruling aristocracy.
His unfairness thus, instead of abating the persecution against the
Jews, might easily be construed into an excuse for a more bitter
anti-semitism.

This error of his is due to his besetting habit of taking his
postulates from doubtful authorities and of drawing illogical
conclusions. It is a common thing for men who have been successful
in one branch of knowledge, and who are regarded as authorities in
a specialty by others, to jump at rash conclusions with regard to
subjects on which authorities differ or do not exist. This is exactly
what Nordau does when he comes to consider facts which cannot be
rightly understood without a clear insight into sociology and other
social sciences. He then evinces impossible opinions, and gives us to
understand that he has a ready-made scheme for reconstructing society
on a new and perfect plan.

It is not difficult to see what this plan is. It is quasi-Collectivism
and Communism. He wishes the State to become the universal heir
of all fortunes and the universal benefactor. The absurdity and
impracticability of this scheme—which, by the way, is always the very
one that first enters the head of a young student who tackles social
science for the first time—are obvious. As however he does not insist
upon his scheme in his volume _Degeneration_, it would be out of place
to explain its hollowness here. We have referred to it simply to show
that his superficiality regarding the anti-semitic question is not
incidental. It will be evident to anybody who tackles this question
with an unprejudiced mind that the Christians in Russia and Germany are
utterly at fault when they believe that they can escape from their
troubles by persecuting Jews, and also that the Jews are utterly at
fault when they attribute anti-semitism to the jealousy and wickedness
of the Christians. Both these parties, as well as Nordau himself,
allow their feelings instead of their intelligence to determine these
questions. But they are not necessarily degenerate.

The true explanation of the imbroglio is as follows: The Jewish race,
which might have acquired a few unpleasant characteristics by no fault
of their own but through a cruel and unjust persecution for centuries,
is a highly-gifted one, distinguishing itself by strong-mindedness,
great will-power, remarkable powers of endurance, morality, and
singleness of purpose. Deprived, in a great number of countries
of social rights and the privileges of citizenship, they have for
centuries found only one way open to them by which they could attain to
independence, security, and consideration—the accumulation of wealth.
In modern times, when social institutions and laws tend to render
wealth almost omnipotent, its acquisition has become to this people of
greater importance than ever. Success in a business, however small,
may mean millions in the future, while failure may result in life-long
misery. Consequently, the Jews apply themselves to their trades or
professions with an energy and assiduity such as few races can command.

They therefore represent a power in the development of humanity
which is bound to produce far-reaching effects. Whether these will
constitute a blessing or a curse to the nations among whom the Jews
live and work depends entirely on the institutions and the laws of
those countries. If these are such as to render the oppression of the
poor, the workers, the borrowers, the tenants—in fact, all the sections
of society on which the Jews now batten,—a condition for the thriving
of the capitalists, the employers, the lenders, the tenants, and the
fortunate classes in general—if the laws are of this description, then
the Jews will be conspicuous as the oppressors of others. But if, on
the contrary, the laws and institutions of the countries are such as to
render the success of the upper classes and leaders of trade, industry,
and finance dependent on the welfare of the workers, then the Jews will
be the most liberal lenders, the most generous employers, and the most
accommodating landlords. In fact, the question resolves itself simply
into one of demand and supply; as long as there is a greater demand
for Jews’ services than the Jews are able to supply, the latter will
dominate; but when there are more services offered on the part of the
Jews than the people can avail themselves of, these can dictate terms
to the Jews. And this relation of demand and supply depends on laws and
institutions.

Even if Nordau’s prejudices prevented him from taking this view of
the anti-semitic question—which is not only the correct one but which
greatly facilitates the solution of the question, and thus would
prevent the disgraceful persecution which in many countries threatens
to become more serious—he might have found, by simply looking at the
actualities, in the different countries that anti-semitism prevails
in an inverse ratio to good government. He could not have asked for
a better proof of the fact that laws and institutions are at fault
and not the Jews or the Christians. To take only the two extremes:
in Russia, where the Government, from the people’s point of view,
is probably the worst in Europe, anti-semitism is most vehement; in
England, where the Government is more influenced by the consideration
of the good of the people than in any other country, there is scarcely
any animosity against the Jews, and this in spite of the efforts of
certain politicians to promote it.

The reception of Dr. Stöcker, when he attempted to address a public
meeting in London in favour of anti-semitism, would have convinced
Nordau, had he been present, what a poor chance anti-semitism has
in a country where the working classes are free to follow those
instincts which Nordau fears so much. We may relate that hardly had
the proceedings begun when the hall was filled by labourers, who,
contrary to their habit on such occasions, had not changed their dress,
and who hooted Dr. Stöcker, stormed the platform, overpowered the
anti-semitists, and cleared the hall.

In face of the fact that anti-semitic questions turn so entirely on
prejudices and mistakes, one cannot surely accuse Wagner of madness
because he sided with what may be called a national party, and approved
of a movement the object of which was to stay the progressive influence
of an alien race over the destiny of the Fatherland.

In several places in his work Nordau insists upon considering the
anarchist tendencies of our age as among the stigmata of degeneration.
If he were right, we should be face to face with a calamity likely to
end in the brutalization or the annihilation of our race. For Anarchism
in some form of other is certainly spreading rapidly. That there is
Anarchism and Anarchism seems of little importance to our alienist
in his eagerness to draw his preconceived conclusions. He reasons
as usual. Starting from the hypothesis that some of the criminal
Anarchists were, to some extent, mentally deranged and morally weak,
he arrives at the conclusion that Wagner was a degenerate, because he
shared to some extent with the Anarchists the hatred of our present
social system and of the injurious effects it produces on the masses of
the people.

Though Nordau dwells far more lengthily on poetry, and art, and cognate
subjects than on the graver question of Anarchism, there is no point on
which it behoves us better to set him and his readers right than that
of the relation between Anarchism and degeneration.

The Anarchist is not a cause. He is an effect. There is a feeling in
the consciousness of almost every human being, be he a believer in a
divine religion or in Nordau’s religion of humanity, that our race is
destined to a high degree of development, and to a far larger sphere
of happiness than now falls to the lot of most of us. This yearning
for happiness, for elevation, is not only a feeling but a conviction
consequent upon our knowledge of the past stages of the development of
man.

There was a time when fervent religious beliefs induced patience and
resignation under suffering, and when our future destiny was left in
the hands of Providence. But the French encyclopædists, and after them
the modern scientists, have done their best to undermine this belief
and to show us that the destiny of future generations will largely
depend upon us and themselves, that science is placing in our hands an
ever-growing control over the forces of nature, and that if humanity
suffers it is because the present generation has not the moral courage
to throw off religious scruples and boldly shape their own destiny.

These doctrines, in unison with the general progressive spirit of
the age, led to revolutions and political reforms. In the absence
of a providence the nations shifted their faith to constitutional
governments. But the new faith did not last long. The more democratic
the governments were the more they applied the principles of
Collectivism—they yielded to those instincts which Nordau calls the
social instincts. Under the pretext of exercising paternal kindness
towards the people, the governments demanded paternal rights.
Communistic and socialistic ideas spread among the masses, who, well
aware that a providence without power would be no providence at all,
wanted to render the State omnipotent. When however socialistic
features were introduced into the constitutions, matters did not mend,
but the freedom of the individual was more and more infringed.

When detailed schemes of further socialistic development were made
public, a great many freedom-loving men and women beheld with terror
that the chief cause of the favour with which the progressing socialism
was regarded was to be found in the plan of complete subjection of the
individual under government.

This discovery naturally caused a reaction in favour of liberty. Those
who became Anarchists felt keenly the claws of the State upon them, and
they foresaw that more socialism would aggravate their grievances. They
took for granted that humanity had now tried all forms of government
and that they had all failed, and that the salvation of the race could
only be found in absolute personal freedom.

The first extreme Russian Nihilists paved the way for the Anarchist
movement in Europe. They, like their first followers in France, had
only one idea, that of destroying at all costs the present order of
things, and thus clearing the ground for a new system to grow up
free from the tyranny of governments, aristocracies, militarism,
landlordism, and capitalism.

They saw that an immense mass of poor, hard-working, honest people
with but a small chance of happiness for themselves, but imbued with a
strong desire to see the whole of humanity happy, were oppressed by a
small number of selfish people who arrogated to themselves the lion’s
share of the good things of life. They found that this band of selfish
people attained to their immense power by a social system of slow and
gradual growth. Tracing all the troubles to the few egotists whom they
regarded as criminals, they imagined that by destroying them and the
system, the unselfish and humanitarian aspirations of the masses would
blossom forth free and unvitiated.

The Anarchists were thus the backbone of the religion of humanity, only
their faith was stronger than that of Nordau, for they were willing to
sacrifice all, including life, for the good of the race.

If these people were, and are, degenerate, then every mistake in
reasoning is a sign of degeneration, and faith in humanity and its
destiny is the beginning of madness.

When Nordau designates Wagner as an Anarchist, he evidently ignores
the fact that there are two kinds of Anarchists, the violent ones just
described, and the moderate or constitutional ones. The latter call
themselves simply Anarchists. Their numbers are growing rapidly in
France, as well as in England, and in both these countries Nordau would
be surprised at their moderation and common sense. The movement they
represent is a reaction against the socialistic tendencies, and their
programme is not violence and destruction, but the gradual abolition of
all harmful and useless legislation. It is true that so far they have
no precise policy. But such special measures as are advocated—partly
in France, partly in England, and partly in the United States—seem to
be founded on clear and thorough reasoning, and when their leading
principle is compared with the shallow chatter of Socialists and
Communists of every school it appears as wisdom itself.

What all these people believe, what they long for, and what they hope
for, is exactly what Wagner believed, longed for, and hoped for. He
saw in Philistinism, in official tyranny, in police government, and in
legal trammels standing in the way of trades, industries, and arts,
so many impediments to the realization of the best instincts and the
highest aspirations of humanity. Whatever opinions he held, they can
only be judged by the few exasperated exclamations he gave vent to with
regard to the corruption of modern society. It is not likely that he,
with such immense works on hand, should have given sufficient attention
to social questions to allow him to express himself in learned terms.
But what he said and wrote on the subject shows clearly that the
foundation of his social views was trust in humanity, in the sanctity
of nature, and in the ennobling power of liberty. Can any one with a
true love of art imagine an artist without such a creed?

What was more natural than that, fêted and praised as he was, he should
have a good opinion of his own talent and consider himself a great man?
If for this he deserved to be suspected of megalomania, what are we to
say about other celebrities, mediocrities, and nonentities, who imagine
themselves demi-gods because they happen to be the sons of their
fathers, to be born in purple, or to have a title attached to their
name?

Nordau is extremely hard on those who have sung the praises of Wagner,
and insinuates that they have been actuated by base motives when they
have not been absolutely degenerated. According to him, admiration
for Wagner’s works is a sure sign of mental unsoundness. And yet this
same Nordau finds reasons for praising Wagner’s genius which a host of
his panegyrists have overlooked. He says: “Wagner, as a dramatist is
really an historical painter of the highest rank.... This [a fresco
painter] he is in a degree never yet attained by any other dramatic
author in the whole world of literature. Every action embodies itself
for him in a series of most imposing pictures, which, when they are
composed as Wagner has seen them with his inner eye, must overwhelm
and enrapture the beholder. The reception of the guests in the hall of
Wartburg; the arrival and departure of Lohengrin in the boat drawn by
the swan; the gambols of the Rhine maidens in the river; the defiling
of the gods over the rainbow-bridge towards the castle of Asgard;
the bursting of the moonlight into Hunding’s hut; the ride of the
Walküre over the battle-field; Brunhilde in the circle of fire; the
final scene in ‘Götterdämmerung,’ where Brunhilde flings herself on to
her horse and leaps into the midst of the funeral pyre, while Hagan
throws himself into the surging Rhine, and the heavens are aflame with
the glow from the burning palace of the gods; the love-feast of the
knights in the castle of the Grail; the obsequies of Titurel and the
healing of Amfortas—these are pictures to which nothing in art hitherto
approaches.”

It is strange that Nordau in his love for authorities should quote
Nietzsche—a German author whom, in another part of his book, he makes
out to be a hopeless degenerate and charlatan—in support of his views
of Wagner! But Nietzsche has written a book called _Der Fall Wagner_,
and that suffices. This Nietzsche calls Wagner a comedian, but Nordau
insists upon his being a painter, and that “if he had been a healthy
genius, endowed with intellectual equilibrium, that is what he would
undoubtedly have become. His inner vision would have forced the brush
into his hand, and would have constrained him to use it on canvas by
means of colour.”

When Nordau says a painter, he evidently restricts the meaning of the
word to its narrowest sense, and makes it difficult to at all class a
man who, like Wagner, evolved and produced pictures of such grandeur
and such beauty as those our alienist so well describes. The fact that
the artist uses actual perspective, real draperies, living people,
actual fire, that he selects his own light, and personally arranges
this mass of objects so as to exactly reproduce the daring conception
of his mind—all this should surely not be cited as so many proofs
of the unhealthiness of his genius. Would he have been a greater, a
sounder genius, had his ability been restricted to sketching and
colouring his conceptions on cardboard or canvas? Should then a
painter’s genius be confined to the production of pictures suitable
only to decorate Philistine houses and official galleries? Because
Nordau’s pedantic tendencies have formed such a Philistine idea about
the art of painting, is it right to deny true genius to a man who has
produced unapproachable pictures on a colossal scale, not by the means
of brushes and pigments, but by materials infinitely more difficult to
handle?

But these masterpieces of painting do not alone bear witness to
Wagner’s powers. His paintings are not fixed; they are movable. They
represent actually an enchanting succession of pictures. The true
genius _à la_ Nordau gives us the pictures of figures in motion that
never move, and tires us with a Quintus Curtius suspended in mid-air
half way down a chasm, until we wish him at the bottom of it. Such a
moving picture of Wagner’s is not thrust upon us suddenly in the manner
of gallery pictures, but is presented to us as the fit illustration
of a beautiful poem, and often as the climax of a series of other
pictures which explain it, relieve it, and work up our emotions for its
reception.

To this must be added that the same painter-genius, the same dramatist,
the same poet, has created the wondrous and enchanting music which
accompanies the poem and the pictures. And because he has done all
this, because he has not followed the routine of other German painters,
because he has dared to and succeeded in transporting his audiences
into the highest possible region of imagination, and given them a
glimpse of real creative powers, he is to be classed as a degenerate;
to rank among those of whom humanity is ashamed, and whose degraded
state is to warn us of the coming decay of our race.

Can any one with a grain of humour read Nordau’s attacks on Wagner
without imagining an irascible toy-terrier barking at the moon?

Nordau probably feels that Wagner’s anti-semitism, his Anarchism,
and his ability to create transcendentally beautiful pictures are
stigmata which hardly any of his readers would accept as such, and
consequently feels impelled to make much of what it pleases him to
call Wagner’s eroticism. Here, as everywhere in his book, in order
to impress his readers he counts on the mystical effect which the
use of a high-sounding scientific word generally produces upon
unscientific readers. A favourite expression of his, when speaking of
some psychological phenomenon, is that science knows all about it,
and he calls it megalomania, graphomania, echolalia, or some such
name. With people who have only a superficial knowledge of science,
and who stand in awe of its achievements, such nouns stand for a
special definite thing, thoroughly investigated and explained. They
do not know that these scientific names have been invented, not in
order to designate something real and palpable, but simply for the
purpose of bringing order into an arbitrary classification, invented
so that the exchange of ideas may be facilitated on the subject thus
treated. Such scientific terms might even be classed among mystical
symbols, in so far as they often stand for something of which hardly
anything is known, but at the same time serve the same useful end
as algebraical figures. Psychologists are prone to speak of a man’s
consciousness, though scarcely two scientific men would agree as to
what it is. But this does not prevent them from dividing consciousness
up into divisions and sub-divisions, all with their special names, in
order to be able to express their ideas in words. The unscientific
reader should bear in mind that consciousness has never been under
the microscope, or in the crucible, and that the classification of
the scientists has no counterpart in consciousness itself, and that
this remains the impalpable and indivisible _Ego_, with its infinite
number of attributes inseparably commingled. All the different states,
conditions, faculties, perfections, and defects of the _Ego_ are
of course known only by the results they produce in the physical
world, and it is by these results that they have been classified.
It is evident that such methods of classification should leave an
immense margin for those who wish, or feel impelled by their own
idiosyncrasies, to misuse scientific terms designating psychological
phenomena.

Nordau indulges in this misuse of scientific terms to the fullest
extent, in a way not to be easily discovered by the non-scientific
reader. The word “eroticism” used by him so frequently, with all the
pomposity of a scientific term, is coined from the word “erotic,” a
literary term which again is derived, as we all know, from Eros, the
Greek god of love. It is an adjective which means pertaining to or
expressive of love-passion. Such an adjective necessarily finds an
enormously wide application, considering that love in one sense is the
leading principle in organic creation, and, in a more psychological
sense, the motive power in the human drama. We may say that we
ourselves, the outcome of love, regulate our whole life, and sometimes
base our hopes of a future state on love. Consequently there is hardly
anything in our lives that is not covered by the adjective “erotic.”

The alienists having adopted the word “eroticism” in order to designate
a state of mind which certain actions reveal to them, and which state
of mind, when its existence is corroborated by other facts, may be
considered as a disease, it is evident that, while they may apply the
word “eroticism” to almost anything in the organic world and in human
society, it is better for their purpose to apply it only to a certain
form of a diseased mind. While a strictly logical and careful alienist
might deem it irrational and confusing to use the term “eroticism,” or
even the adjective “erotic,” outside a clearly defined case of mental
disease, it cannot be considered absolutely wrong to apply such terms
whenever the love-passion is in question, even a love-passion of a most
legitimate kind.

We shall now show how Nordau manages to slip over the border
within which scientific terms should be used, and applies them
indiscriminately to everything; and how he, in this manner, tries to
establish that Wagner suffers from erotic madness, because he looks
upon love as one of the chief motors in the human drama and the tree of
knowledge for good or evil.

Nordau, in a flippant criticism, which he endeavours to render funny,
of the behaviour of Wagner’s characters on the stage, forgets his
self-criticism to such an extent as to liken them to mad tom-cats—a
simile which probably no sane man would accept as true. Having once
conceived the idea of mad tom-cats, it at once becomes an obsession
in his mind, and suggests presentations of real cases of erotic fury.
He consequently, according to his habit, takes for granted that the
actors on the stage must necessarily represent the exact state of mind
of the author, and cries out that this state of the author’s mind
(which he has persuaded himself is that of a mad tom-cat) is well known
to science, and is called sadism. Then, with a regret at having to
touch upon subjects in order to make his readers understand Wagner’s
real mental condition, he gives a disgusting example of a maniac whose
erotic madness has brought him below the level of the brute.

This is a fair sample of Nordau’s logic. For the sake of clearness,
we recapitulate the logical _tour de force_ he has been compelled
to exercise in order to arrive at such an absurdity: Wagner, like
all poets and dramatists before him, creates a love scene. Love is
an erotic emotion. Eroticism is a disease of the mind. Tom-cats are
erotically influenced. The characters on the stage remind Nordau of
tom-cats. The obsession of a “tom-cat in convulsions over a root of
valerian” suggests a raving madman. Consequently Wagner is mad.

Such is the use a scientist is tempted to make of his science when he
throws self-criticism overboard.

When Nordau says of Wagner that he has been all his life an erotic, he
is fair enough to add in parentheses, “in a psychiatric sense.” But
this is not enough. The word “psychiatric” is a strictly scientific
word, not to be found in any ordinary English dictionary; and the
ordinary reader might easily conclude that, instead of removing
Wagner’s eroticism into the deep recesses of his soul, it might have
been used by the author, as so many scientific words have been used, in
order to aggravate his charge.

In order to justify his opinion with regard to Wagner’s erotic madness,
he says: “The most ordinary incitements, even those farthest removed
from the province of sexual instincts, never fail to awaken in his
consciousness voluptuous images of an erotic character.” Why “sexual
instincts”? Why not love-instincts, an expression which had so much
better fitted in with the scenes Wagner represents? But, as it suits
Nordau’s purpose to keep his reader’s mind upon love in its lowest,
most animal form, we shall let it pass. We must however express our
astonishment at the example he gives in order to show how incitements,
“far removed from the province of sexual instincts,” caused Wagner’s
mind to revert to voluptuous images. The “farthest removed incitements”
which Nordau quotes is the description by Wagner of a ballet—a _pas de
trois_—evidently intended to represent the blending of the beautiful
with love, to give Wagner’s own words, “love and life, the joy and
wooing of art.” What on earth, then, would more arouse such eroticism
that might be found in a man than a ballet representing love and
life? And this especially when we consider the modern freedom with
regard to the costume of ballet girls. In order to show what Nordau
considers to be the outcome of erotic madness in Wagner’s choregraphic
representation of love, life, and art, we give _in extenso_ the passage
from _Art-Work of the Future_, to which he refers:

“In the contemplation of this ravishing dance of the most genuine
and noblest muses of the artistic man, we now see the three arm in
arm lovingly entwined up to their necks, then this, then that one,
detaching herself from the entwinement, as if to display to the others
her beautiful form in complete separation, touching the hands of the
others only with the extreme tips of her fingers; now the one, entwined
by a backward glance at the twin forms of her closely entwined sisters,
bending towards them; then two, carried away by the allurements of the
one, greeting her in homage; finally all, in close embrace, breast to
breast, limb to limb, in an ardent kiss of love, coalescing in one
blissfully living shape. This is the love and life, the joy and wooing
of art,” etc.

When Nordau wishes to traduce the love scenes in Wagner’s operas into
arguments of the musician’s erotic madness, he forgets many things. He
forgets what he himself has given as a test of a sound mind, namely,
the ability to look after one’s own business. Even if Wagner had
produced scenes on his stage of an utterly corrupt character in order
to gain money and popularity, he having succeeded completely in such
objects could not possibly be called mad by a critic who has made
material success in life a test for sound-mindedness, and who declares
the belief in personal responsibility reaching beyond the grave to
be a sign of madness. But he also forgets, what is more important,
that there is no line of demarcation drawn to indicate how far the
representation of human passions may be carried on the stage.

Even Nordau does not seem to have discovered an authority on this
subject. He himself will not serve as an authority, because he has
shown himself too apt to fall into the error of newspaper critics,
that of judging a work or a piece, not according to its merits, but
according to the author who has produced it. He would praise in Goethe
what he would condemn in Wagner. If we were to indiscriminately ask
people how far we may go in representing human passion on the stage,
we should get a mass of replies all differing according to the bias of
the respondents. The Ultramontane abbé, the zealous Methodist, would
differ enormously from the Bohemian artist; the prudish old maid would
differ from the poet. Nay, even two artists, both painters of the nude,
or two ballet girls appearing in the same costume, might hold almost
opposite opinions on this subject. How then shall we judge? By leaving
out of court all the extremists—those who object to theatres, ballets,
and nature in art—as well as those who would clamour for indecent
and obscene representations, we might considerably narrow the ground
for inquiry, and elicit certain rules likely to meet the suffrage of
the majority within these limits. It might be argued that emotions,
playing by far the most important _rôle_ in the human drama, and lying
as they do at the root of all our actions, educational agencies,
and amusements, ought to be appealed to by the arts. Also that art,
in affording us opportunities of giving expression to our emotions,
elevates and ennobles our lives: consequently, that the passive,
objective contemplation of human emotions which the stage affords us
helps us to study our own emotions and to bring them into harmony with
our noblest aspirations, our future happiness, our judgment, and our
will. In order to accomplish their mission, such representations should
be as true to life as possible, whether they be beautiful or not. On
this plea, it would be legitimate to represent on the stage erotic
emotions in the full strength in which we meet with them in reality
among sound-minded people. A good deal of exaggeration may be permitted
to the actor as he is under the difficulty of having to convey by
actions, gestures, or facial expression a distinct representation of
emotions which may rage in the consciousness of a human being without
betraying themselves in physical signs.

From this it must be concluded that the purity of the stage depends
more on what is acted than how it is acted. The author who does not
wish to desecrate the drama is therefore bound to represent emotions
which are the outcome of natural life, and acted upon by incidents such
as we see around us and to avoid the representation of, even if he
cannot avoid the reference to, emotions which spring from a diseased
mind or a morbid moral state.

Love, being an emotion to which every sound-minded being may be
subject, there would be no objection to represent it in the most
intense manner on the stage so long as we understand under the name
of love that strong degree of affection which sometimes people of the
opposite sex may conceive for each other apart from sexual emotions.
What makes Nordau’s reasoning plausible is that he does not admit that
this kind of love exists. He distinguishes only two degrees, or two
categories, of love, comradeship or friendship on the one hand, and
the animal instinct on the other. But no one who has gone through life
with open eyes can possibly deny the reality of what we here, for want
of a better expression, would call pure love. Everywhere we meet with
manifestations of it. Even young children, who might have no idea of
sexual emotion, often love each other with a genuine passion which
sometimes lasts through life. Adults may be so absorbed in love for
each other as to prefer death to separation, and yet never experience
any sexual emotion in each other’s company. Men and women lovers who
have been separated have wasted away from sheer love of each other,
and yet been remarkably chaste in character. In the English-speaking
countries, where the relations between the sexes are free and natural,
we find any number of proofs of the reality of pure love. Those cases
alone which have ended tragically, and therefore come before the
public, more than suffice to prove it. Even in countries like France,
for example, where the sexual instincts are apt to become morbid from
the one-sided education of the young, it is not difficult to find
examples of pure love. It is even to be found where least expected, as,
for instance, between a licentious man and a fallen woman. It is true
that when pure love runs its usual course it gets, so to say, inflamed
by animal passion, but this is generally the case only as a result of
the demonstrations by which pure love tries to manifest itself. It may
also be true that there exists a mysterious, that is to say a so far
unexplained, connection between the purest love and sexual instinct
even in loving couples to whom sexuality may be an abomination. But
all this does not disprove that, speaking from a practical and ethical
point of view, there is such an emotion as pure love, and that this
emotion is a powerful motor in the human drama.

If it then be a fact that this yearning to love and to be loved with
a pure love exists, and ought to exist, in rational human beings,
and that in running its natural course it will manifest itself
in demonstrations extremely likely to rouse animal passions, the
question arises how far a love scene on the stage may display those
demonstrations which, while they are the only possible means of
expressing pure love, at the same time suggest sexual emotions.

Here then is the point where the difference will arise, and where we
may well be careful whose decision we accept. Can we do better than
Wagner did—leave the audience to decide?

Wagner’s German audiences, described by Nordau as including wives and
daughters, have, to his great bewilderment, given the verdict in favour
of Wagner’s most passionate scenes. “How unperverted,” Nordau cries
out, “must wives and maidens be, when they are in a state of mind to
witness these pieces without blushing crimson, and sinking to the earth
for shame!” No. They have not blushed in following calmly and serenely
the objective representations of passions which by nature have been
implanted in every breast. The very vehemence, the very naturalness of
the scenes inspire that awe and reverence which great natural forces
always do, and the young girl in the audience does not for a moment
revert to any impure representations or animal promptings which might
have come within her experience, because she is æsthetically and not
sexually excited. But if Nordau could watch her when she reads the
above quoted passage in his book, he would see her blush deeply, not at
the memory of Wagner’s scenes, but at the feeling of having the first
seed of degeneration sown in her heart.

Among the phrases used by Nordau in order to inculcate his readers with
the idea that Wagner, instead of being the very essence of an artist,
one of the greatest practically creative geniuses of the world, is a
mere erotic maniac, is this one—“all his ideas revolve about woman.”
While this phrase may lead the unwary reader astray, it throws a vivid
light on the extent to which Nordau’s opinion with regard to the
relation of the sexes has been influenced by his continental bias. This
ought to be made clear to his readers. Such expressions, if of any use
at all in Nordau’s reasoning, pre-suppose that it is quite an unusual
thing for the ideas of poets, dramatists, and writers of fiction to
revolve about woman. For our alienist does not refer to Wagner’s
private life. He is speaking only of Wagner the author. The actual
fact, of course, is that love and women have from times immemorial been
the subject of legends, fairy tales, troubadour songs, poems, romances,
novels, and dramas. Thus, according to the gospel of our alienist, all
the past and present poetical authors of the world must have been, and
are, “subject to erotic madness,” like Wagner.

There are, of course, men who, like Faust, devote their lives to
intellectual pursuits and expend all their energy in forcing nature to
yield up her secrets. But such men are not only exceptions—they may be
looked upon as degenerates. This is what Faust at last discovered. He
recognised that life was essentially emotion

 A SILENT WITNESS

 CHAPTER I.
 THE BEGINNING OF THE MYSTERY

The history upon which I am now embarking abounds in incidents so
amazing that, as I look back on them, a something approaching to
scepticism contends with my vivid recollections and makes me feel
almost apologetic in laying them before the reader. Some of them
indeed are so out of character with the workaday life in which they
happened that they will appear almost incredible; but none is more
fraught with mystery than the experience that befell me on a certain
September night in the last year of my studentship and ushered in the
rest of the astounding sequence.

It was past eleven o’clock when I let myself out of my lodgings at
Gospel Oak; a dark night, cloudy and warm and rather inclined to rain.
But, despite the rather unfavourable aspect of the weather, I turned
my steps away from the town, and walking briskly up the Highgate Road,
presently turned into Millfield Lane. This was my favourite walk and
the pretty winding lane, meandering so pleasantly from Lower Highgate
to the heights of Hampstead, was familiar to me under all its aspects.

On sweet summer mornings when the cuckoos called from the depths of
Ken Wood, when the path was spangled with golden sunlight, and saucy
squirrels played hide and seek in the shadows under the elms (though
the place was within earshot of Westminster and within sight of the
dome of St. Paul’s); on winter days when the Heath wore its mantle of
white and “the ring of gliding steel” came up from the skaters on the
pond below; on August evenings, when I would come suddenly on
sequestered lovers (to our mutual embarrassment) and hurry by with
ill-feigned unconsciousness. I knew all its phases and loved them all.
Even its name was delightful, carrying the mind back to those more
rustic days when the wits foregathered at the Old Flask Tavern and
John Constable tramped through this very lane with his colour-box
slung over his shoulder.

It was very dark after I had passed the lamp at the entrance to the
lane. Very silent and solitary too. Not a soul was stirring at this
hour, for the last of the lovers had long since gone home and the
place was little frequented even in the daytime. The elms brooded over
the road, shrouding it in shadows of palpable black, and their leaves
whispered secretly in the soft night breeze. But the darkness, the
quiet and the solitude were restful after the long hours of study and
the glare of the printed page, and I strolled on past the ghostly pond
and the little thatched cottage, now wrapped in silence and darkness,
with a certain wistful regret that I must soon look my last on them.
For I had now passed all my examinations but the final “Fellowship,”
and must soon be starting my professional career in earnest.

Presently a light rain began to fall. Foreseeing that I should have to
curtail my walk, I stepped forward more briskly, and, passing between
the posts, entered the narrowest and most secluded part of the lane.
But now the rain suddenly increased, and a squall of wind drove it
athwart the path. I drew up in the shelter of one of the tall oak
fences by which the lane is here inclosed, and waited for the shower
to pass. And as I stood with my back to the fence, pensively filling
my pipe, I became for the first time sensible of the utter solitude of
the place.

I looked about me and listened. The lane was darker here than
elsewhere; a mere trench between the high fences. I could dimly see
the posts at the entrance and a group of large elms over-shadowing
them. In the other direction, where the lane doubled sharply upon
itself, was absolute, inky blackness, save where a faint glimmer from
the wet ground showed the corner of the fence and a projecting stump
or tree-root jutting out from the corner and looking curiously like a
human foot with the toes pointed upward.

The rain fell steadily with a soft, continuous murmur; the leaves of
the elm-trees whispered together and answered the falling rain. The
Scotch pines above my head stirred in the breeze with a sound like the
surge of the distant sea. The voices of Nature, hushed and solemn,
oblivious of man like the voices of the wilderness; and over all and
through all, a profound, enveloping silence.

I drew up closer to the fence and shivered slightly, for the night was
growing chill. It seemed a little lighter now in the narrow,
trench-like lane; not that the sky was less murky but because the
ground was now flooded with water. The posts stood out less vaguely
against the back-ground of wet road, and the odd-looking stump by the
corner was almost distinct. And again it struck me as looking
curiously like a foot--a booted foot with the toe pointing upwards.

The chime of a church clock sounded across the Heath, a human voice,
this, penetrating the desolate silence. Then, after an interval, the
solemn boom of Big Ben came up faintly from the sleeping city.

Midnight! and time for me to go home. It was of no use to wait for the
rain to cease. This was no passing shower, but a steady drizzle that
might last till morning. I re-lit my pipe, turned up my collar, and
prepared to plunge into the rain. And as I stepped out, the
queer-looking stump caught my eye once more. It was singularly like a
foot; and it was odd, too, that I had never noticed it before in my
many rambles through the lane.

A sudden, childish curiosity impelled me to see what it really was
before I went, and the next moment I was striding sharply up the
sodden path. Of course, I expected the illusion to vanish as I
approached. But it did not. The resemblance increased as I drew
nearer, and I hurried forward with something more than curiosity.

It _was_ a foot! I realized it with a shock while I was some paces
away; and, as I reached the corner, I came upon the body of a man
lying in the sharp turn of the path; and the limp, sprawling posture,
with one leg doubled under, told its tale at a glance.

I laid my finger on his wrist. It was clammy and cold, and not a
vestige of a pulse could I detect. I struck a wax match and held it to
his face. The eyes were wide-open and filmy, staring straight up into
the reeking sky. The dilated pupils were insensitive to the glare of
the match, the eyeballs insensitive to the touch of my finger.

Beyond all doubt the man was dead.

But how had he died? Had he simply fallen dead from some natural
cause, or had he been murdered? There was no obvious injury, and no
sign of blood. All that the momentary glimmer of the match showed was
that his clothes were shiny with the wet; a condition that might
easily, in the weak light, mask a considerable amount of bleeding.

When the match went out, I stood for some moments looking down on the
prostrate figure as it lay with the rain beating down on the upturned
face, professional interest contending with natural awe of the tragic
presence. The former prompted me to ascertain without delay the cause
of death; and, indeed, I was about to make a more thorough search for
some injury or wound when something whispered to me that it is not
well to be alone at midnight in a solitary place with a dead
man,--perchance a murdered man. Had there been any sign of life, my
duty would have been clear. As it was, I must act for the best with a
due regard to my own safety. And, reaching this conclusion, I turned
away, with a last glance at the motionless figure and set forth
homeward at a rapid pace.

As I turned out of Millfield Lane into Highgate Rise I perceived a
policeman on the opposite side of the road standing under a tree,
where the light from a lamp fell on his shining tarpaulin cape. I
crossed the road, and, as he civilly touched his helmet, I said: “I am
afraid there is something wrong up the lane, Constable; I have just
seen the body of a man lying on the pathway.”

The constable woke up very completely. “Do you mean a dead man, sir?”
he asked.

“Yes, he is undoubtedly dead,” I replied.

“Whereabouts did you see the body?” enquired the constable.

“In the narrow part of the lane, just by the stables of Mansfield
House.”

“That’s some distance from here,” said the constable. “You had better
come with me and report at the station. You’re sure the man was dead,
sir?”

“Yes, I have no doubt about it. I am a medical man,” I added, with
some pride (I had been a medical man about three months, and the
sensation was still a novel one).

“Oh, are you, sir?” said the officer, with a glance at my half-fledged
countenance; “then, I suppose you examined the body?”

“Sufficiently to make sure that the man was dead, but I did not stay
to ascertain the cause of death.”

“No, sir; quite so. We can find that out later.”

As we talked, the constable swung along down the hill, without hurry,
but at a pace that gave me very ample exercise, and I caught his eye
from time to time, travelling over my person with obvious professional
interest. When we had nearly reached the bottom of the hill, there
appeared suddenly on the wet road ahead, a couple of figures in
waterproof capes.

“Ha!” said the constable, “this is fortunate. Here is the inspector
and the sergeant. That will save us the walk to the station.”

He accosted the officers as they approached and briefly related what I
had told him.

“You are sure the man was dead, sir?” said the inspector, scrutinizing
me narrowly; “but, there, we needn’t stay here to discuss that. You
run down, sergeant and get a stretcher and bring it along as quickly
as you can. I must trouble you, sir, to come with me and show me where
the body is. Lend the gentleman your cape, sergeant; you can get
another at the station.”

I accepted the stout cape thankfully, for the rain still fell with
steady persistency, and set forth with the inspector to retrace my
steps. And as we splashed along through the deep gloom of the lane,
the officer plied me with judicious questions.

“How long did you think the man had been dead?” he asked.

“Not long, I should think. The body was still quite limp.”

“You didn’t see any marks of violence?”

“No. There were no obvious injuries.”

“Which way were you going when you came on the body?”

“The way we are going now, and, of course, I came straight back.”

“Did you meet or see anyone in the lane?”

“Not a soul,” I answered.

He considered my answers for some time, and then came the question
that I had been expecting.

“How came you to be in the lane at this time of night?”

“I was taking a walk,” I replied, “as I do nearly every night. I
usually finish my evening’s reading about eleven, and then I have some
supper and take a walk before going to bed, and I take my walk most
commonly in Millfield Lane. Some of your men must remember having met
me.”

This explanation seemed to satisfy him for he pursued the subject no
farther, and we trudged on for awhile in silence. At length, as we
passed through the posts into the narrow part of the lane, the
inspector asked: “We’re nearly there, aren’t we?”

“Yes,” I replied: “the body is lying in the bend just ahead.”

I peered into the darkness in search of the foot that had first
attracted my notice, but was not yet able to distinguish it. Nor, to
my surprise, could I make it out as we approached more nearly; and
when we reached the corner, I stopped short in utter amazement.

The body had vanished!

“What’s the matter?” asked the inspector. “I thought this was the
place you meant.”

“So it is,” I answered. “This is the place where the body was lying;
here, across the path, with one foot projecting round the corner.
Someone must have carried it away.”

The inspector looked at me sharply for a moment. “Well, it isn’t here
now,” said he, “and if it has been taken away, it must have been taken
along towards Hampstead Lane. We’d better go and see.” Without waiting
for a reply, he started off along the lane at a smart double and I
followed.

We pursued the windings of the lane until we emerged into the road by
the lodge gates, without discovering any traces of the missing corpse
or meeting any person, and then we turned back and retraced our steps;
and as we, once more, approached the crook in the lane where I had
seen the body, we heard a quick, measured tramp.

“Here comes the sergeant with the stretcher,” observed the inspector;
“and he might have saved himself the trouble.” Once more the officer
glanced at me sharply, and this time with unmistakable suspicion.

“There’s no body here, Robson,” he said, as the sergeant came up,
accompanied by two constables carrying a stretcher. “It seems to have
disappeared.”

“Disappeared!” exclaimed the sergeant, bestowing on me a look of
extreme disfavour; “that’s a rum go, sir. How could it have
disappeared?”

“Ah! that’s the question!” said the inspector. “And another question
is, was it ever here? Are you prepared to make a sworn statement on
the subject, sir?”

“Certainly I am,” I replied.

“Then,” said the inspector, “we will take it that there was a body
here. Put down that stretcher. There is a gap in the fence farther
along. We will get through there and search the meadow.”

The bearers stood the stretcher up against a tree and we all proceeded
up the lane to the place where the observant inspector had noticed the
opening in the fence. The gravel, though sodden with the wet, took but
the faintest impressions of the feet that trod it, and, though the
sergeant and the two constables threw the combined light of their
lanterns on the ground, we were only able to make out very faintly the
occasional traces of our own footsteps.

We scrutinized the break in the fence and the earth around with the
utmost minuteness, but could detect no sign of anyone having passed
through. The short turf of the meadow, on which I had seen sheep
grazing in the daytime, was not calculated to yield traces of anyone
passing over it, and no traces of any kind were discoverable. When we
had searched the meadow thoroughly and without result, we came back
into the lane and followed its devious course to the “kissing-gate” at
the Hampstead Lane entrance. And still there was no sign of anything
unusual. True, there were obscure footprints in the soft gravel by the
turnstile, but they told us nothing; we could not even be sure that
they had not been made by ourselves on our previous visit. In short,
the net result of our investigations was that the body had vanished
and left no trace.

“It’s a very extraordinary affair,” said the inspector, in a tone of
deep discontent, as we walked back. “The body of a full-grown man
isn’t the sort of thing you can put in your pocket and stroll off with
without being noticed, even at midnight. Are you perfectly sure the
man was really dead and not in a faint?”

“I feel no doubt whatever that he was dead,” I replied.

“With all respect to you, sir,” said the sergeant, “I think you must
be mistaken. I think the man must have been in a dead faint, and after
you came away, the rain must have revived him so that he was able to
get up and walk away.”

“I don’t think so,” said I, though with less conviction; for, after
all it was not absolutely impossible that I should have been mistaken,
since I had discovered no mortal injury, and the sergeant’s suggestion
was an eminently reasonable one.

“What sized man was he?” the inspector asked.

“That I couldn’t say,” I answered. “It is not easy to judge the height
of a man when he is lying down and the light was excessively dim. But
I should say he was not a tall man and rather slight in build.”

“Could you give us any description of him?”

“He was an elderly man, about sixty, I should think, and he appeared
to be a clergyman or a priest, for he wore a Roman collar with a
narrow, dark stripe up the front. He was clean shaven, and, I think,
wore a clerical suit of black. A tall hat was lying on the ground
close by and a walking-stick which looked like a malacca, but I
couldn’t see it very well as he had fallen on it and most of it was
hidden.”

“And you saw all this by the light of one wax match,” said the
inspector. “You made pretty good use of your eyes, sir.”

“A man isn’t much use in my profession if he doesn’t,” I replied,
rather stiffly.

“No, that’s true,” the inspector agreed. “Well, I must ask you to give
us the full particulars at the station, and we shall see if anything
fresh turns up. I’m sorry to keep you hanging about in the wet, but it
can’t be helped.”

“Of course it can’t,” said I, and we trudged on in silence until we
reached the station, which looked quite cheerful and homelike despite
the grim blue lamp above the doorway.

“Well, Doctor,” said the inspector, when he had read over my statement
and I had affixed my signature, “if anything turns up, you’ll hear
from us. But I doubt if we shall hear anything more of this. Dead or
alive, the man seems to have vanished completely. Perhaps the
sergeant’s right after all, and your dead man is at this moment
comfortably tucked up in bed. Good-night, Doctor, and thank you for
all the trouble you have taken.”

By the time that I reached my lodgings I was tired out and miserably
cold; so cold that I was fain to brew myself a jorum of hot grog in my
shaving pot. As a natural result, I fell fast asleep as soon as I got
to bed and slept on until the autumn sunshine poured in through the
slats of the Venetian blind.




 CHAPTER II.
 THE FINDING OF THE RELIQUARY

I awoke on the following morning to a dim consciousness of something
unusual, and, as my wits returned with the rapidity that is natural to
the young and healthy, the surprising events of the previous night
reconstituted themselves and once more set a-going the train of
speculation. Vividly I saw with my mind’s eye the motionless figure
lying limp and inert with the pitiless rain beating down on it; the
fixed pupils, the insensitive eyeballs, the pulseless wrist and the
sprawling posture. And again I saw the streaming path, void of its
dreadful burden, the suspicious inspector, the incredulous sergeant;
and the unanswerable questions formulated themselves anew.

Had I, after all, mistaken a living man for a dead body? It was in the
highest degree improbable, and yet it was not impossible. Or had the
body been spirited away without leaving a trace? That also was highly
improbable and yet, not absolutely impossible. The two contending
improbabilities cancelled one another. Each was as unlikely as the
other.

I turned the problem over again and again as I shaved and took my
bath. I pondered upon it over a late and leisurely breakfast. But no
conclusion emerged from these reflections. The man, living or dead,
had been lying motionless in the lane all the time that I was
sheltering, and probably for some time before. In the interval of my
absence he had vanished. These were actual facts despite the open
incredulity of the police. How he had come there, what had occasioned
his death or insensibility, how he had disappeared and whither he had
gone; were questions to which no answer seemed possible.

The fatigues of the previous night had left me somewhat indolent.
There was no occasion for me to go to the hospital to-day. It was
vacation time; the school was closed; the teaching staff were mostly
away, and there was little doing in the wards. I decided to take a
holiday and spend a quiet day rambling about the Heath, and, having
formed this resolution, I filled my pipe, slipped a sketch-book into
my pocket, and set forth.

Automatically my feet turned towards Millfield Lane. It was, as I have
said, my usual walk, and on this morning, with last night’s
recollections fresh in my mind, it was natural that I should take my
way thither.

Very different was the aspect of the lane this morning from that which
I had last looked upon. The gloom and desolation of the night had
given place to the golden sunshine of a lovely autumn day. The elms,
clothed already in the sober livery of the waning year, sighed with
pensive reminiscence of the summer that was gone; the ponds repeated
the warm blue of the sky; and the lane itself was a vista of
flickering sunlight and cool, reposeful shadow.

The narrow continuation beyond the posts was wrapped as always, in a
sombre shade, save where a gleam of yellow light streamed through a
chink between the boards of the fence. I made my way straight to the
spot where the body had lain and stooped over it, examining each
pebble with the closest scrutiny. But not a trace remained. The hard,
gravelly soil retained no impress either of the body or even of our
footsteps; and as for the stain of blood, if there had ever been any,
it would have been immediately removed by the falling rain, for the
ground here had a quite appreciable slope and must have been covered
last night by a considerable flowing stream.

I went on to the break in the fence--it was on the right-hand side of
the path--and was at once discouraged by the aspect of the ground; for
even our rough tramplings had left hardly a trace behind. After an
aimless walk across the meadow, now occupied by a flock of sheep, I
returned to the lane and walked slowly back past the place where I had
sheltered from the rain. And then it was that I discovered the first
hint of any clue to the mystery. I had retraced my steps some little
distance past the spot where I had seen the body, when my eye was
attracted by a darkish streak on the upper part of the high fence. It
was quite faint and not at all noticeable on the weather-stained oak,
but it chanced to catch my eye and I stopped to examine it. The fence
which bore it was the opposite one to that in which the break
occurred, and, since I had sheltered under it, the side of it which
looked towards the lane must have been the lee side and thus less
exposed to the rain.

I looked at the stain attentively. It extended from the top of the
fence--which was about seven feet high--half-way to the ground, fading
away gradually in all directions. The colour was a dull brown, and the
appearance very much that of blood which had run down a wet surface.
The board which bore the stain was traversed by a vertical crack near
one edge, so that I was able to break off a small piece without much
difficulty; and on examining that portion of the detached piece which
had formed the side of the crack, I found it covered with a
brownish-red, shiny substance, which I felt little doubt was dried
blood, here protected by the crack and so less altered by contact with
water.

Naturally, my next proceeding was to scrutinize very carefully the
ground immediately beneath the stain. At the foot of the fence, a few
tussocks of grass and clumps of undergrown weeds struggled for life in
the deep shade. The latter certainly had, on close examination, the
appearance of having been trodden on, though it was not very evident.
But while I was considering an undoubted bruise on the stalk of a
little dead-nettle, my eye caught the glint of some bright object
among the leaves. I picked it out eagerly and held it up to look at
it; and a very curious object it was; evidently an article of
jewellery of some kind, but quite unlike anything I had ever seen
before. It appeared to be a little elongated, gold case, with eight
sides and terminating at either end in a blunt octagonal pyramid with
a tiny ring at its apex, so that it seemed to have been part of a
necklace. Of the eight flat sides, six were ornamented with sunk
quatrefoils, four on each side; the other two sides were plain except
that each had a row of letters engraved on it--A.M.D.G. on one side,
and S.V.D.P. on the other. There was no hall-mark and, as far as I
could see, no means of opening the little case. It seemed to have been
suspended by a thin silk cord, a portion of which remained attached to
one ring and showed a frayed end where it had broken or chafed
through.

I wrapped the little object and the detached fragment of the fence in
my handkerchief (for I had broken off the latter with the idea of
testing it chemically for blood-pigment), and then resumed my
investigations. The appearances suggested that the body had been
lifted over the fence, and the question arose, What was on the other
side? I listened attentively for a few seconds, and then, hearing no
sound of footsteps, I grasped the top of the fence, gave a good spring
and hoisting myself up, sat astride and looked about me. The fence
skirted the margin of a small lake much overgrown with weeds, amidst
which I could see a couple of waterhens making off in alarm at my
appearance, and beyond the lake rose the dark mass of Ken Wood. The
ground between the fence and the lake was covered with high, reedy
grass, which, immediately below my perch, bore very distinct
impressions of feet, and an equally distinct set of tracks led away
towards the wood--or from the wood to the fence; it was impossible to
say which. But in any case, as there were no other tracks, it was
certain that the person who made them had climbed over the fence. I
dropped down on the grass and, having examined the ground attentively
without discovering anything fresh, set off to follow the tracks.

For some distance they continued through high grass in which the
impressions were very distinct: then they entered the wood, and here
also, in the soft humus, lightly sprinkled with fallen leaves, the
footprints were deep and easy to follow. But presently they struck a
path, and, as they did not reappear on the farther side, it was
evident that the unknown person had proceeded along it. The path was
an old one, well made of hard gravel, and, where it passed through the
deeper shade of the wood, was covered with velvety moss and grey-green
lichen; on which I made out with some difficulty, the imprints of
feet. But these were no longer distinct; they did not form a connected
track; nor was it possible to distinguish them from the footprints of
other persons who might have passed along the path. Even these I soon
lost where I had halted irresolutely under a noble beech that rose
from a fantastic coil of roots, and was considering how, if at all, I
should next proceed, when, there appeared round a curve of the path a
man in cord breeches and gaiters, evidently a keeper. He touched his
hat civilly and ventured to enquire my business.

“I am afraid I have no business here at all,” I replied, for I did not
think it expedient to tell him what had brought me into the wood. “I
suppose I am trespassing.”

“Well, sir, it is private property,” he rejoined, “and being so near
London we have to be rather particular. Perhaps you would like me to
show you the way out on to the Heath.”

I accepted his offer with many thanks for his courteous method of
ejecting a trespasser, and we walked together through the beautiful
woodland until the path terminated at a rustic turnstile.

“That will be your way, sir,” he said, as he let me out, indicating a
track that led down to the Vale of Health. I thanked him once more and
then asked:

“Is that a private house or does it belong to your estate?” I pointed
to a small house or large cottage that stood within a fenced enclosure
not far from the edge of the wood.

“That, sir,” he replied, “was formerly a keeper’s lodge. It is now let
for a short term to an artist gentleman who is making some pictures of
the Heath, but I expect it will be pulled down before long, as there
is some talk of the County Council taking over that piece of land to
add to the public grounds. Good-morning, sir,” and the keeper, with a
parting salute, turned back into the wood.

As I took my way homeward by the Highgate Ponds I meditated on the
relation of my new discoveries to the mystery of the preceding night.
It was a strange affair, and sinister withal.

That the tracks led from the lane to the wood and not from the wood to
the lane, I felt firmly convinced; and equally so that the body of the
unknown priest or clergyman had undoubtedly been spirited away. But
whither had it been carried? Presumably to some sequestered spot in
the wood. And what better hiding-place could be found? There, buried
in the soft leaf-mould, it might lie undisturbed for centuries,
covered only the deeper as each succeeding autumn shed its russet
burden on the unknown grave.

And what, I wondered, was the connection between this mysterious
tragedy and the queer little object that I had picked up? Perhaps
there was none. Its presence at that particular spot might be nothing
but a coincidence. I took it from my handkerchief and examined it
afresh. It was a very curious object. As to its use or meaning, I
could only form vague surmises. Perhaps it was some kind of locket,
enclosing a wisp of hair; the hair perhaps of some dead child or wife
or husband or even lover. It was impossible to say. Of course, this
question could be settled by taking it to pieces, but I was loth to
injure the pretty little bauble; besides it was not mine. In fact, I
felt that I ought to notify publicly that I had found it, though the
circumstances did not make this very advisable. But if it had any
connection with the tragedy, what was the nature of that connection?
Had it dropped from the dead man or from the murderer--as I assumed
the other man to be? Either was equally possible, though the two
possibilities had very different values.

Then the question arose as to what course I should pursue. Clearly it
would be my duty to inform the police of the mark on the fence and the
tracks through the grass. But should I hand over the mysterious
trinket to them? It seemed the correct thing to do, and yet there
might after all be no connection between it and the crime. In the end
I left the matter to be decided by the attitude of the police
themselves.

I called at the station on my way home and furnished the inspector
with an account of my new discoveries; of which he made a careful
note, assuring me that the affair should be looked into. But his
manner expressed frank disbelief, and was even a trifle hostile; and
his emphatic request that I would abstain from mentioning the matter
to anyone left me in no doubt that he regarded both my communications
as wild delusions if not as a deliberate hoax. Consequently, though I
frequently reproached myself afterwards with the omission, I said
nothing about the trinket, and when I left the station I carried it in
my pocket.

No communication on the subject of this mysterious affair ever reached
me from the police. That they did actually make some perfunctory
investigations, I learned later, as will appear in this narrative. But
they gave no publicity to the affair and they sought no further
information from me. For my own part, I could, naturally, never forget
so strange an experience; but time and the multitudinous interests of
my opening life tended to push it farther into the background of
memory, and there it might have remained for ever had not subsequent
events drawn it once more from its obscurity.




 CHAPTER III.
 “WHO IS SYLVIA?”

The winter session had commenced at the hospital, but at Hampstead
the month of October had set in with something like a return to
summer. It is true that the trees had lost something of their leafy
opulence, and that here and there, amidst the sober green, patches of
russet and gold had made their appearance, as if Nature’s
colour-orchestra were tuning up for the final symphony. But,
meanwhile, the sun shone brightly and with a genial heat, and if, day
by day, he fell farther from the zenith, there was nothing to show it
but the lengthening noonday shadows, the warmer blue of the sky and
the more rosy tint of the clouds that sailed across it.

Other and more capable pens than mine have set forth the charm of
autumn and the beauties of Hampstead--queen of suburbs of the world’s
metropolis; therefore will I refrain, and only note, as relevant to
the subject, the fact that on many a day, when the work of the
hospital was in full swing, I might have been seen playing truant very
agreeably on the inexhaustible Heath or in the lanes and fields
adjacent thereto. In truth, I was taking the final stage of my
curriculum rather lazily, having worked hard enough in the earlier
years, and being still too young by several months to be admitted to
the fellowship of the College of Surgeons; promising myself that when
the weather broke I would settle down in earnest to the winter’s work.

I have mentioned that Millfield Lane was one of my favourite haunts;
indeed, from my lodgings, it was the most direct route to the Heath,
and I passed along it almost daily; and never, now, without my
thoughts turning back to that rainy night when I had found the
dead--or unconscious--man lying across the narrow footway. One
morning, as I passed the spot, it occurred to me to make a drawing of
the place in my sketch-book, that I might have some memorial of that
strange adventure. The pictorial possibilities of the lane just here
were not great, but by taking my stand at the turn, on the very spot
where I had seen the body lying, I was able to arrange a simple
composition which was satisfactory enough.

I am no artist. A neat and intelligible drawing is the utmost that I
can produce. But even this modest degree of achievement may be very
useful, as I had discovered many a time in the wards or
laboratories--indeed, I have often been surprised that the instructors
of our youth attach such small value to the power of graphic
expression; and it came in usefully now, though in a way that was
unforeseen and not fully appreciated at the moment. I had dealt
adequately with the fence, the posts, the tree-trunks and other
well-defined forms and was beginning a less successful attack on the
foliage, when I heard a light, quick step approaching from Hampstead
Lane. Intuition--if there is such a thing--fitted the foot-step with a
personality, and, for once in a way, was right; as the new-comer
reached the sharp bend of the path, I saw a girl of about my own age,
simply and serviceably dressed and carrying a pochade box and a small
camp-stool. She was not an entire stranger to me. I had met her often
in the lane and on the Heath--so often in fact that we had developed
that profound unconsciousness of one another’s existence that almost
amounts to recognition--and had wondered vaguely who she was and what
sort of work she did on the panels in that mysterious box.

As I drew back to make way for her, she brushed past, with a single,
quick, inquisitive glance at my sketch-book, and went on her way,
looking very much alive and full of business. I watched her as she
tripped down the lane and passed between the posts out into the
sunlight beyond, to vanish behind the trunks of the elms; then I
returned to my sketch and my struggles to express foliage with a touch
somewhat less suggestive of a birch-broom.

When I had finished my drawing, I sauntered on rather aimlessly,
speculating for the hundredth time on the meaning of those discoveries
of mine in this very lane. Was it possible that the man whom I had
seen was not dead, but merely insensible? I could not believe it. The
whole set of circumstances--the aspect of the body, the blood-stain on
the fence, the tracks through the high grass and the mysterious gold
trinket--were opposed to any such belief. Yet, on the other hand, one
would think that a man could not disappear unnoticed. This was no
tramp or nameless vagrant. He was a clergyman or a priest, a man who
would be known to a great number of persons and whose disappearance
must surely be observed at once and be the occasion of very stringent
enquiries. But no enquiries had apparently been made. I had seen no
notice in the papers of any missing cleric, and clearly the police had
heard nothing or they would have looked me up. The whole affair was
enveloped in the profoundest mystery. Dead or alive, the man had
vanished utterly; and whether he was dead or alive, the mystery was
equally beyond solution.

These reflections brought me, almost unconsciously, to another of my
favourite walks; the pretty footpath from the Heath to Temple Fortune.
I had crossed the stile and stepped off the path to survey the
pleasant scene, when my eye was attracted by a number of streaks of
alien colour on the leaves of a burdock. Stooping down, I perceived
that they were smears of oil-paint, and inferred that someone had
cleaned a palette on the herbage; an inference that was confirmed a
moment later by what looked like the handle of a brush projecting from
a clump of nettles. When I drew it out, however, it proved to be not a
brush, but a very curious knife with a blade shaped like a diminutive
and attenuated trowel; evidently a painting-knife and also evidently
home-made, at least in part, for the tang had been thrust into a
short, stout brush-handle and secured with a whipping of waxed thread.
I dropped it into my outside breast pocket and went on my way,
wondering if by chance it might have been dropped by my fair
acquaintance; and the thought was still in my mind when its object
hove in sight. Turning a bend in the path, I came on her quite
suddenly, perched on her little camp-stool in the shadow of the hedge,
with the open sketching-box on her knees, working away with an
industry and concentration that seemed to rebuke my own idleness.
Indeed, she was so much engrossed with her occupation that she did not
notice me until I stepped off the path and approached with the knife
in my hand.

“I wonder,” said I, holding it out and raising my cap, “if this
happens to be your property. I picked it up just now among the nettles
near the barn.”

She took the knife from me and looked at it inquisitively. “No,” she
replied, “it isn’t mine, but I think I know whose it is. I suspect it
belongs to an artist who has been doing a good deal of work about the
Heath. You may have seen him.”

“I have seen several artists working about here during the summer.
What was this one like?”

“Well,” she answered with a smile, “he was like an artist. Very much
like. Quite the orthodox get-up. Wide brimmed hat, rather long hair
and a ragged beard. And he wore sketching spectacles--half-moon-shaped
things, you know--and kid gloves--which were not quite so orthodox.”

“Very inconvenient, I should think.”

“Not so very. I work in gloves myself in the cold weather or if the
midges are very troublesome. You soon get used to the feel of them;
and the man I am speaking of wouldn’t find them in the way at all
because he works almost entirely with painting-knives. That is what
made me think that this knife was probably his. He had several, I
know, and very skillfully he used them, too.”

“You have seen his work, then?”

“Well,” she admitted, “I’m afraid I descended once or twice to play
the ‘snooper.’ You see, his method of handling interested me.”

“May I ask what a ‘snooper’ is?” I enquired.

“Don’t you know? It’s a student’s slang name for the kind of person
who makes some transparent pretext for coming off the path and passing
behind you to get a look at your picture by false pretences.”

For an instant there flashed into my mind the suspicion that she was
administering a quiet “back-hander,” and I rejoined hastily:

“I hope you are not including me in the genus ‘snooper.’”

She laughed softly. “It did sound rather like it. But I’ll give you
the benefit of the doubt in consideration of your finding the
knife--which you had better keep in trust for the owner.”

“Won’t you keep it? You know the probable owner by sight and I don’t;
and meanwhile you might experiment with it yourself.”

“Very well,” she replied, dropping it into her brush-tray, “I’ll keep
it for the present at any rate.”

There was a brief pause, and then I ventured to remark, “That looks a
very promising sketch of yours. And how well the subject comes.”

“I’m glad you like it,” she replied, quite simply, viewing her work
with her head on one side. “I want it to turn out well, because it’s a
commission, and commissions for small oil paintings are rare and
precious.”

“Do you find small oil pictures very difficult to dispose of?” I
asked.

“Not difficult. Impossible, as a rule. But I don’t try now. I copy my
oil sketches in water-colour, with modifications to suit the market.”

Again there was a pause; and, as her brush wandered towards the
palette, it occurred to me that I had stayed as long as good manners
permitted. Accordingly, I raised my cap, and, having expressed the
hope that I had not greatly hindered her, prepared to move away.

“Oh, not at all,” she answered; “and thank you for the knife, though
it isn’t mine--or, at any rate, wasn’t. Good-morning.”

With this and a pleasant smile and a little nod, she dismissed me; and
once more I went my idle and meditative way.

It had been quite a pleasant little adventure. There is always
something rather interesting in making the acquaintance of a person
whom one has known some time by sight but who is otherwise an unknown
quantity. The voice, the manner, and the little revelations of
character, which confirm or contradict previous impressions, are
watched with interest as they develop themselves and fill in, one by
one, the blank spaces of the total personality. I had, as I have said,
often met this industrious maiden in my walks and had formed the
opinion that she looked a rather nice girl; an opinion that was
probably influenced by her unusual good looks and graceful carriage.
And a rather nice girl she had turned out to be; very dignified and
self-possessed, but quite simple and frank--though, to be sure, her
gracious reception of me had probably been due to my sketch-book; she
had taken me for a kindred spirit. She had a pleasant voice and a
faultless accent, with just a hint of the fine lady in her manner; but
I liked her none the less for that. And her name was a pretty name,
too, if I had guessed it correctly; for, on the inside of the lid of
her box, which was partly uncovered by the upright panel, I had read
the letters “Syl.” The panel hid the rest, but the name could hardly
be other than Sylvia; and what more charming and appropriate name
could be bestowed upon a comely young lady who spent her days amidst
the woods and fields of my beloved Hampstead?

Regaling myself with this somewhat small beer, I sauntered on along
the grassy lane, between hedgerows that in the summer had been
spangled with wild roses and that were now gay with the big, oval
berries, sleek and glossy and scarlet, like overgrown beads of red
coral; away, across the fields to Golder’s Green and thence by
Millfield Lane, back to my lodgings at Gospel Oak, and to my landlady,
Mrs. Blunt, who had a few plaintive words to say respecting the
disastrous effects of unpunctuality--and the resulting prolonged
heat--on mutton cutlets and fried potatoes.

It had been an idle morning and apparently void of significant events;
but yet, when I look back on it, I see a definite thread of causation
running through its simple happenings, and I realize that, all
unthinking, I had strung on one more bead to the chaplet of my
destiny.




 CHAPTER IV.
 SEPTIMUS MADDOCK, DECEASED

It was getting well on into November when I strolled one afternoon
into the hospital museum, not with any specific object but rather
vaguely in search of something to do. During the last few days I had
developed a slight revival of industry--which had coincided, oddly
enough, with a marked deterioration of the weather--and, pathology
being my weakest point, the museum had seemed to call me (though not
very loudly, I fear) to browse amongst its multitudinous jars and dry
preparations.

There was only one person in the great room; but he was a very
important person; being none other than our lecturer on Medical
Jurisprudence, Dr. John Thorndyke. He was seated at a small table
whereon was set out a collection of jars and a number of large
photographs, of which he appeared to be making a catalogue; but intent
as he was on his occupation, he looked up as I entered and greeted me
with a genial smile.

“What do you think of my little collection, Jardine?” he asked, as I
approached deferentially. Before replying, I ran a vaguely enquiring
eye over the group of objects on the table and was mighty little
enlightened thereby. It was certainly a queer collection. There was a
flat jar which contained a series of five differently-coloured mice,
another with a similar series of three rats, a human foot, a
hand--manifestly deformed--a series of four fowls’ heads and a number
of photographs of plants.

“It looks,” I replied, at length, “like what the auctioneers would
call a miscellaneous lot.”

“Yes,” Dr. Thorndyke agreed, “it is a miscellaneous collection in a
sense. But there is a connecting idea. It illustrates certain
phenomena of inheritance which were discovered and described by
Mendel.”

“Mendel!” I exclaimed. “Who is he? I never heard of him.”

“I daresay not,” said Thorndyke, “though he published his results
before you were born. But the importance of his discoveries is only
now beginning to be appreciated.”

“I suppose,” said I, “the subject is too large and complex for a short
explanation to be possible.”

“The subject is a large one, of course,” he replied; “but, put in a
nutshell, Mendel’s great discovery amounts to this; that, whereas
certain characters are inherited only partially and fade off gradually
in successive generations, certain other characters are inherited
completely and pass unchanged from generation to generation. To take a
couple of illustrative cases: If a negro marries a European, the
offspring are mulattoes--forms intermediate between the negro and the
European. If a mulatto marries a European, the offspring are
quadroons--another intermediate form; and the next generation gives us
the octoroon--intermediate again between the quadroon and the
European. And so, from generation to generation, the negro character
gradually fades away and finally disappears. But there are other
characters which are inherited entire or not at all, and such
characters appear in pairs which are positive or negative to one
another. Sex is a case in point. A male marries a female and the
offspring are either male or female, never intermediate. The
sex-character of only one parent is inherited, and it is inherited
completely. The characters of maleness and femaleness pass down
unchanged through the ages with no tendency to diminish or to shade
off into one another. That is a case of Mendelian inheritance.”

I ran my eyes over the collection and they presently lighted on the
rather abnormal-looking foot, hanging, white and shrivelled in the
clear spirit. I lifted the jar from the table and then, noticing for
the first time, that the foot had a supernumerary toe, I enquired what
point the specimen illustrated.

“That six-toed foot,” Thorndyke replied, “is an example of a deformity
that is transmitted unchanged for an indefinite number of generations.
This brachy-dactylous hand is another instance. The brachy-dactylia
reappears in the offspring either completely or not at all. There are
no intermediate conditions.”

He picked up the jar, and, having wiped the glass with a duster,
exhibited the hand which was suspended within; and a strange-looking
hand it was; broad and stumpy, like the hand of a mole.

“There seem to be only two joints to each finger,” I said.

“Yes. The fingers are all thumbs, and the thumb is only a demi-thumb.
A joint is suppressed in each digit.”

“It must make the hand very clumsy and useless,” I remarked.

“So one would think. It isn’t exactly the type of hand for a Liszt or
a Paganini. And yet we mustn’t assume too much. I once saw an armless
man copying pictures in the Luxembourg, and copying them very well,
too. He held his brush with his toes; and he was so handy with his
feet that he not only painted really dextrously, but managed to take
his hat off to a lady with quite a fine flourish. So you see, Jardine,
it is not the hand that matters, but rather the brain that actuates
it. A very indifferent hand will serve if the motor centres are of the
right sort.”

He replaced the jar on the table, and then, after a short pause,
turning quickly to me, he asked:

“What are you doing at present, Jardine?”

“Principally idling, sir,” I replied.

“And not a bad thing to do either,” he rejoined with a smile, “if you
do it thoroughly and don’t keep it up too long. How would you like to
take charge of a practice for a week or so?”

“I don’t know that I should particularly care to, sir,” I answered.

“Why not? It would be a useful experience and would bring you useful
knowledge; knowledge that you have got to acquire sooner or later.
Hospital conditions, you know, are not normal conditions.

“General practice is normal medical practice, and the sooner you get
to know the conditions of the great world the better for you. If you
stick to the wards too long you will get to be like the nurses; who
seem to think that,


 “‘All the world’s a hospital,
 And men and women only patients.’”


I reflected for a few moments. It was perfectly true. I was a
qualified medical man, and yet of the ordinary routine of private
practice I had not the faintest knowledge. To me, all sick people were
either in-patients or out-patients.

“Had you any particular practice in your mind, sir?” I asked.

“Yes. I met one of our old students just now. He is at his wit’s end
to find a _locum tenens_. He has to go away to-night or to-morrow
morning, but he can’t get anyone to look after his work. Won’t you go
to his relief? It’s an easy practice, I believe.”

I turned the question over in my mind and finally decided to try the
venture.

“That’s right,” said Dr. Thorndyke. “You’ll help a professional
brother, at any rate, and pick up a little experience. Our friend’s
name is Batson, and he lives in Jacob Street, Hampstead Road. I’ll
write it down.”

He handed me a slip of paper with the address on it and wished me
success; and I started at once from the hospital, already quite
elated, as is the way of the youthful, at the prospect of a new
experience.

Dr. Batson’s establishment in Jacob Street was modest to the verge of
dingyness. But Jacob Street, itself, was dingy, and so was the
immediate neighbourhood; a district of tall, grimy houses that might
easily have seen better days. However, Dr. Batson himself was spruce
enough and in excellent spirits at my arrival, as was evident when he
bounced into the room with a jovial greeting, bringing in with him a
faint aroma of sherry.

“Delighted to see you, Doctor!” he exclaimed in his large brisk voice
(that “doctor” was a diplomatic hit on his part. They don’t call
newly-qualified men “doctor” at the hospital.) “I met Thorndyke this
morning and told him of my predicament. A busy man is the Great
Unraveller, but never too busy to do a kindness to his friends. Can
you take over to-night?”

“I could,” said I.

“Then do. I want particularly to be off by the eight-thirty from
Liverpool Street. Drop in and have some grub about six-thirty; I shall
have polished off the day’s work by then and you’ll just come in for
the evening consultations.”

“Are there any cases that you will want me to see with you?” I asked.

“Oh, no,” Batson replied, rather airily I thought. “They’re all plain
sailing. There’s a typhoid, he’s doing well--fourth week; and there’s
a tonsilitis and a psoas abscess--that’s rather tedious, but still,
it’s improving--and an old woman with a liver. You won’t have any
difficulty with them. There’s only one queer case; a heart.”

“Valvular?” I asked.

“No, not valvular; I can tell you that much. I know what it isn’t, but
I’m hanged if I know what it is. Chappie complains of pain, shortness
of breath, faintness and so on, but I can’t find anything to account
for it. Heart-sounds all right, pulse quite good, no dropsy, no
nothing. Seems like malingering, but I don’t see why he should
malinger. I think I’ll get you to drop in this evening and have a look
at him.”

“Are you keeping him in bed?” I asked.

“Yes,” said Batson, “I am now; not that his general condition seems to
demand it. But he has had one or two fainting attacks, and yesterday
he must needs fall down flop in his bedroom when there was nobody
there, and, by way of making things more comfortable, he drops his
medicine bottle and falls on the fragments. He might have killed
himself, you know,” Batson added in an aggrieved tone; “as it was, a
long splinter from the bottom of the bottle stuck into his back and
made quite a deep little wound. So I’ve kept him in bed since, out of
harm’s way; and there he is, deuced sorry for himself but, as far as I
can make out, without a single tangible symptom.”

“No facial signs? Nothing unusual in his colour or expression?”

Batson laughed and tapped his gold-rimmed spectacles.

“Ah! There you are! When you’ve got minus five d and some irregular
astigmatism and a pair of glasses that don’t correct it, all human
beings look pretty much alike; a trifle sketchy, don’t you know. _I_
didn’t see anything unusual in his face, but _you_ might. Time will
show. Now you cut along and fetch your traps, and I’ll skip round and
polish off the sufferers.”

He launched me into the outer greyness of Jacob Street and bounced off
in the direction of Cumberland Market, leaving me to pursue my way to
my lodgings at Gospel Oak.

As I threaded the teeming streets of Camden Town I meditated on the
new experience that was opening to me, and, with youthful egotism, I
already saw myself making a brilliant diagnosis of an obscure heart
case. Also I reflected with some surprise on the calm view that Batson
took of his defective eyesight. A certain type of painter, as I had
observed, finds in semi-blindness a valuable gift which helps him to
eliminate trivial detail and to impart a noble breadth of effect to
his pictures; but to a doctor no such self-delusion would seem
possible. Visual acuteness is the most precious item in his equipment.

I crammed into a large Gladstone bag the bare necessaries for a week’s
stay, together with a few indispensable instruments, and then mounted
the jingling horse-tram of those pre-electric days, which, in due
course, deposited me at the end of Jacob Street, Hampstead Road. Dr.
Batson had not returned from his round when I arrived, but a few
minutes later he burst into the surgery humming an air from “The
Mikado.”

“Ha! Here you are then! Punctual to the minute!” He hung his hat on a
peg, laid his visiting-list on the desk of the dispensing counter and
began to compound medicine with the speed of a prestidigitateur,
talking volubly all the time.

“That’s for the old woman with the liver, Mrs. Mudge, Cumberland
Market, you’ll see her prescription in the day book. S’pose you don’t
know how to wrap up a bottle of medicine. Better watch me. This is the
way.” He slapped the bottle down on a square of cut paper, gave a few
dextrous twiddles of his fingers and held out for my inspection a
little white parcel like the mummy-case of a deceased medicine bottle.

“It’s quite easy when you’ve had a little practice,” he said, deftly
sticking the ends down with sealing-wax, “but you’ll make a frightful
mucker of it at first.” Which prophecy was duly fulfilled that very
evening.

“What time had I better see that heart case?” said I.

“Oh, you won’t have to see it at all. Man’s dead. Message left half an
hour ago. Pity, isn’t it? I should have liked to hear what you thought
of him. Must have been fatty heart. I’ll write out the certificate
while I think of it. Maggie! Where’s that note that Mrs. Samway left?”

The question was roared out vaguely through the open door to a servant
of unknown whereabouts, and resulted in the appearance of a somewhat
scraggy housemaid bearing an opened note.

“Here we are,” said Batson, snatching the note out of its envelope and
opening the book of certificate forms; “Septimus Maddock was the
chappie’s name, age fifty-one, address 23, Gayton Street, cause of
death--that’s just what I should like to know--primary cause,
secondary causes--I wish these infernal government clerks had got
something better to do than fill printed forms with silly conundrums.
I shall put “Morbus Cordis”; that ought to be enough for them. Mrs.
Samway--that’s his landlady, you know--will probably call for the
certificate during the evening.”

“Aren’t you going to inspect the body?” I asked.

“Lord, no! Why should I! It isn’t necessary, you know. I’m not an
undertaker. Wish I was. Dead people good deal more profitable than
live ones.”

“But surely,” I exclaimed, “the death ought to be verified. Why the
man may not be dead at all.”

“I know,” said Batson, scribbling away like a minor poet, “but that
isn’t my business. Business of the Law. Law wastes your time with a
heap of silly questions that don’t matter and leaves out the question
that does. Asks exact time when I last saw him alive, which doesn’t
matter a hang, and doesn’t ask whether I saw him dead. Bumble was
right. Law’s an ass.”

“But still,” I persisted, “leaving the legal requirements out of
consideration, oughtn’t you for your own sake, and as a public duty,
to verify the death? Supposing the man were not really dead?”

“That would be awkward for him,” said Batson, “and awkward for me,
too, if he came to life before they buried him. But it doesn’t really
happen in real life. Premature burial only occurs in novels.”

His easy-going confidence jarred on me considerably. How could he, or
anyone else, know what happened?

“I don’t see how you arrive at that,” I objected. “It could only be
proved by wholesale disinterment. And the fact remains that, if you
don’t verify a reported death you have no security against premature
burial--or even cremation.”

Batson started up and stared at me, his wide-open, pale-blue eyes
looking ridiculously small through his deep, concave spectacles.

“By Jove!” he exclaimed, “I am glad you mentioned that--about
cremation, I mean, because that is what will probably happen. I
witnessed the chappie’s will a couple of days ago, and I remember now
that one of the clauses stipulated that his body should be cremated.
So I shall have to verify the death for the purpose of the cremation
certificate. We’d better pop round and see him at once.”

With characteristic impulsiveness he sprang to his feet, snatched his
hat from its peg, and started forth, leaving me to follow.

“Beastly nuisance, these special regulations,” said Batson, as he
ambled briskly up the street. “Give a lot of trouble and cause a lot
of delay.”

“Isn’t the ordinary death certificate sufficient in a case of
cremation?” I asked.

“For purposes of law it is, though there is some talk of new
legislation on the subject, but the Company are a law unto themselves.
They have made the most infernally stringent regulations, and, as
there is no crematorium near London excepting the one at Woking, you
have to abide by their rules. And that reminds me--” here Batson
halted and scowled at me ferociously through his spectacles.

“Reminds you?” I repeated.

“That they require a second death certificate, signed by a man with
certain special qualifications.” He stood awhile frowning and
muttering under his breath and then suddenly turned and bounced off in
a new direction.

“Going to catch the other chappie and take him with us,” he explained,
as he darted out into the Hampstead Road. “Be off my mind then. A
fellow named O’Connor, Assistant Physician to the North London
Hospital. He’ll do if we can catch him at home. If not, you’ll have to
manage him.”

Batson looked at his watch--holding it within four inches of his
nose--and broke into a trot as we entered a quiet square. Halfway up
he halted at a door which bore a modest brass plate inscribed “Dr.
O’Connor,” and seizing the bell-knob, worked it vigorously in and out
as if it were the handle of an air-pump.

“Doctor in?” he demanded briskly of a startled housemaid; and, without
waiting for an answer, he darted into the hall, down the whole length
of which he staggered, executing a sort of sword-dance, having caught
his toe on an unobserved door-mat.

The doctor was in and he shortly appeared in evening dress with an
overcoat on his arm, and apparently in as great a hurry as Batson
himself.

“Won’t it do to-morrow?” he asked, when Batson had explained his
difficulties and the service required.

“Might as well come now,” said Batson persuasively; “won’t take a
minute and then I can go away in peace.”

“Very well,” said O’Connor, wriggling into his overcoat. “You go along
and I’ll follow in a few minutes. I’ve got to look in on a patient on
my way up west, and I shall be late for my appointment as it is. Write
the address on my card, here.”

He held out a card to my principal, and when the latter had scribbled
the address on it, he bustled out and vanished up the square. Batson
followed at the same headlong speed, and, again overlooking the mat,
came out on the pavement like an ill-started sprinter.

Gayton Street, at which we shortly arrived, was a grey and dingy
side-street exactly like a score of others in the same locality, and
Number 23 differed from the rest of the seedy-looking houses in no
respect save that it was perhaps a shade more dingy. The door was
opened in answer to Batson’s indecorously brisk knock by a woman--or
perhaps I should say a lady--who at once admitted us and to whom
Batson began, without preface, to explain the situation.

“I got your note, Mrs. Samway. Was going to bring my friend, here,
round to see the patient. Very unfortunate affair. Very sad.
Unexpected, too. Didn’t seem particularly bad yesterday. What time did
it happen?”

“I can’t say exactly,” was the reply. “He seemed quite comfortable
when I looked in on him the last thing at night, but when I went in
about seven this morning he was dead. I should have let you know
sooner, but I was expecting you to call.”

“H’m, yes,” said Batson, “very unfortunate. By the way, Mr. Maddock
desired that his remains should be cremated, I think?”

“Yes, so my husband tells me. He is the executor of the will, you
remember, in the absence of any relatives. All Mr. Maddock’s relations
seem to be in America.”

“Have you got the certificate forms?” asked Batson.

“Yes. My husband got all the papers from the undertaker this
afternoon.”

“Very well, Mrs. Samway, then we’ll just take a look at the body--have
to certify that I’ve seen it, you know.”

Mrs. Samway ushered us into a sitting-room where she had apparently
been working alone, for an unfinished mourning garment of some kind
lay on the table. Leaving us here, she went away and presently
returned with a sheaf of papers and a lighted candle, when we rose and
followed her to a back room on the ground floor. It was a smallish
room, sparely furnished, with heavy curtains drawn across the window,
and by one wall a bed, on which was a motionless figure covered by a
sheet.

Our conductress stood the candlestick on a table by the bed and
stepped back to make way for Batson, who drew back the sheet and
looked down on the body in his peering, near-sighted fashion. The
deceased seemed to be a rather frail-looking man of about fifty, but,
beyond the fact that he was clean shaven, I could form very little
idea of his appearance, since, in addition to the usual bandage under
the chin to close the mouth, a tape had been carried round the head to
secure a couple of pads of cotton wool over the eyes to keep the
eyelids closed.

As Batson applied his stethoscope to the chest of the dead man, I
glanced at our hostess not without interest. Mrs. Samway was an
unusual-looking woman, and I thought her decidedly handsome though not
attractive to me personally. She seemed to be about thirty, rather
over the medium height and of fine Junoesque proportions, with a small
head very gracefully set on the shoulders. Her jet-black hair,
formally parted in the middle, was brought down either side of the
forehead in wavy, but very smooth, masses and gathered behind in a
neat, precisely-plaited coil. The general effect reminded me of the
so-called “Clytie,” having the same reposefulness though not the
gentleness and softness of that lovely head. But the most remarkable
feature of this woman was the colour of her eyes, which were of the
palest grey or hazel that I have ever seen; so pale in fact that they
told as spots of light, like the eyes of some lemurs or those of a cat
seen in the dusk; a peculiarity that imparted a curiously intense and
penetrating quality to her glance.

I had just noted these particulars when Batson, having finished his
examination, held out the stethoscope to me.

“May as well listen, as you’re here,” said he, and, turning to our
hostess, he added: “Let us see those papers, Mrs. Samway.”

As he stepped over to the table, I took his place on a chair by the
bedside and proceeded to make an examination. It was, of course, only
a matter of form, for the man was obviously dead; but having insisted
so strongly on the necessity of verifying the death I had to make a
show of becoming scepticism. Accordingly I tested, both by touch and
with the stethoscope, the region of the heart. Needless to say, no
heart-sounds were to be distinguished, nor any signs of pulsation;
indeed, the very first touch of my hand on the chilly surface of the
chest was enough to banish any doubt. No living body could be so
entirely destitute of animal heat.

I laid down the stethoscope and looked reflectively at the dead man,
lying so still and rigid, with his bandaged jaws and blindfolded eyes,
and speculated vaguely on his personality when alive and on the hidden
disease that had so suddenly cut him off from the land of the living;
and insensibly--by habit I suppose--my fingers strayed to his clammy,
pulseless wrist. The sleeve of his night-shirt was excessively long,
almost covering the fingers, and I had to turn it back to reach the
spot where the pulse would normally be felt. In doing this, I moved
the dead hand slightly and then became aware of a well-marked _rigor
mortis_, or death stiffening in the arm of the corpse; a condition
which I ought to have observed sooner.

At this moment, happening to look up, I caught the eye of Mrs. Samway
fixed on me with a very remarkable expression. She was leaning over
Batson as he filled up the voluminous certificate, but had evidently
been watching me, and the expression of her pale, cat-like eyes left
no doubt in my mind that she strongly resented my proceedings. In some
confusion, and accusing myself of some failure in outward decorum, I
hastily drew down the dead man’s sleeve and rose from the bedside.

“You noticed, I suppose,” said I, “that there is fairly well-marked
_rigor mortis_?”

“I didn’t,” said Batson, “but if you did it’ll do as well. Better
mention it to O’Connor when he comes. He ought to be here now.”

“Who is O’Connor?” asked Mrs. Samway.

“Oh, he is the doctor who is going to sign the confirmatory
certificate.”

Again a gleam of unmistakable anger flashed from our hostess’ eyes as
she demanded:

“Then who is this gentleman?”

“This is Dr. Humphrey Jardine,” said Batson. “’Pologize for not
introducing him before. Dr. Jardine is taking my practice while I’m
away. I’m off to-night for about a week.”

Mrs. Samway withered me with a baleful glance of her singular eyes,
and remarked stiffly:

“I don’t quite see why you brought him here.”

She turned her back on me, and I decided that Mrs. Samway was somewhat
of a Tartar; though, to be sure, my presence was a distinct intrusion.
I was about to beat a retreat when Batson’s apologies were interrupted
by a noisy rat-tat at the street door.

“Ah, here’s O’Connor,” said Batson, and, as Mrs. Samway went out to
open the door, he added: “Seem to have put our foot in it, though I
don’t see why she need have been so peppery about it. And O’Connor
needn’t have banged at the door like that, with death in the house.
He’ll get into trouble if he doesn’t look out.”

Our colleague’s manner was certainly not ingratiating. He burst into
the room with his watch in his hand protesting that he was three
minutes late already, “and,” he added, “if there is one thing that I
detest, it’s being late at dinner. Got the forms?”

“Yes,” replied Batson, “here they are. That’s my certificate on the
front page. Yours is overleaf.”

Dr. O’Connor glanced rapidly down the long table of questions,
muttering discontentedly. “‘Made careful external examination?’ H’m.
‘Have you made a post mortem?’ No, of course, I haven’t. What an
infernal rigmarole! If cremation ever becomes general there’ll be no
time for anything but funerals. Who nursed the deceased?”

“I did,” said Mrs. Samway. “My husband relieved me occasionally, but
nearly all the nursing was done by me. My name is Letitia Samway.”

“Was the deceased a relation of yours?”

“No; only a friend. He lived with us for a time in Paris and came to
England with us.”

“What was his occupation?”

“He was nominally a dealer in works of art. Actually he was a man of
independent means.”

“Have you any pecuniary interest in his death?”

“He has left us about seventy pounds. My husband is the executor of
the will.”

“I see. Well, I’d better have a few words with you outside, Batson,
before I make my examination. It’s all a confounded farce, but we must
go through the proper forms, I suppose.”

“Yes, by all means,” said Batson. “Don’t leave any loop-hole for
queries or objections.” He rose and accompanied O’Connor out into the
hall, whence the sound of hurried muttering came faintly through the
door.

As soon as we were alone, I endeavoured to make my peace with Mrs.
Samway by offering apologies for my intrusion into the house of
mourning.

“For the time being,” I concluded, “I am Dr. Batson’s assistant, and,
as he seemed to wish me to come with him, I came without considering
that my presence might be objected to. I hope you will forgive me.”

My humility appeared entirely to appease her; in a moment her stiff
and forbidding manner melted into one that was quite gracious and she
rewarded me with a smile that made her face really charming.

“Of course,” she said, “it was silly of me to be so cantankerous and
so rude, too. But it did look a little callous, you know, when I saw
you playing with his poor, dead hand; so you must make allowances.”
She smiled again, very prettily, and at this moment my two colleagues
re-entered the room.

“Now, then,” said O’Connor, “let us see the body and then we shall
have finished.”

He strode over to the bed, and, turning back the sheet, made a rapid
inspection of the corpse.

“Ridiculous farce,” he muttered. “Looks all right. Would, in any case
though. Parcel of red tape. What’s the good of looking at the outside
of a body? Post-mortem’s the only thing that’s any use. What’s this
piece of tape-plaster on the back?”

“Oh,” said Batson, “that is a little cut that he made by falling on a
broken bottle. I stuck the plaster on because you can’t get a bandage
to hold satisfactorily on the back. Besides, he didn’t want a bandage
constricting his chest.”

“No, of course not,” O’Connor agreed. “Well, it’s all regular and
straightforward. Give me the form and I’ll fill it up and sign it.” He
seated himself at the table, looked once more at his watch, groaned
aloud and began to write furiously.

“The Egyptians weren’t such bad judges, after all,” he remarked as he
laid down the pen and rose from his chair. “Embalming may have been
troublesome, but when it was done it was done for good. The deceased
was always accessible for reference in case of a dispute, and all this
red tape was saved. Good-night, Mrs. Samway.” He buttoned up his coat
and bustled off, and a minute or so later we followed.

“By Jove!” exclaimed Batson, “this business has upset my arrangements
finely. I shall have to buck up if I’m going to catch my train.
There’s all the medicine to be made up and sent out yet, to say
nothing of dinner. But dinner will have to wait until the business is
all settled up. Don’t you hurry, Jardine. I’ll just run on and get to
work.” He broke into an elephantine trot and soon disappeared round a
corner, and, when I arrived at the surgery, I found him posting up the
day-book with the speed of a parliamentary reporter.

Batson’s dexterity with medicine-bottles and wrapping paper filled me
with admiration and despair. I made a futile effort to assist, but in
the end, he snatched away the crumpled paper in which I was struggling
to enswathe a bottle, dropped it into the waste-paper basket, snatched
up a clean sheet and--slap! bang! in the twinkling of an eye, he had
transformed the bottle into a neat, little white parcel as a conjuror
changes a cocked hat into a guinea-pig. It was wonderful.

My host was a cheerful soul, but restless. He got up from the table no
less than six times to pack some article that he had just thought of;
and after dinner, when I accompanied him to his bedroom, I saw him
empty his trunk no less than three times to make sure that he had
forgotten nothing. He quite worried me. Your over-quick man is apt to
wear out other people’s nerves more than his own. I began to look
anxiously at the clock, and felt a real relief when the maid came to
announce that the cab was at the door.

“Well, good-bye, Doctor!” he sang out cheerily, shaking my hand
through the open window of the cab. “Don’t forget to keep the
stock-bottles filled up. Saves a world of trouble. And don’t take too
long on your rounds. Ta! ta!”

The cab rattled away and I went back into the house, a full-blown
general practitioner.




 CHAPTER V.
 THE LETHAL CHAMBER

A young and newly-qualified doctor, emerging for the first time into
private practice, is apt to be somewhat surprised and disconcerted by
the new conditions. Accustomed to the exclusively professional and
scientific atmosphere of the hospital, the sudden appearance of the
personal element as the predominant factor rather takes him aback. He
finds himself in a new and unexpected position. No longer a mere,
impersonal official, a portion of a great machine, he is the paid
servant of his patients: who are not always above letting him feel the
conditions of his service. The hospital patient, drilled into a
certain respectful submissiveness by the discipline of the wards, has
given place to an employer, usually critical, sometimes truculent and
occasionally addicted to a disagreeable frankness of speech.

The _locum tenens_, moreover, is peculiarly susceptible to these
conditions, especially if, as in my case, his appearance is youthful.
Patients resent the substitution of a stranger for the familiar
medical attendant and are at no great pains to disguise the fact. The
“old woman with the liver” (to adopt Batson’s pellucid phrase) hinted
that I was rather young, adding encouragingly that I should get the
better of that in time; while the more morose typhoid bluntly informed
me that he hadn’t bargained for being attended by a medical student.

Taken as a whole, I found private practice disappointing and soon
began to wish myself back in the wards and to sigh for my quiet,
solitary rambles on Hampstead Heath.

Still, there were rifts in the cloud. Some of the patients appreciated
the interest that I took in their cases, evidently contrasting it with
the rather casual attitude of my principal, and some were positively
friendly. But, in general, my reception was such as to make me
slightly apprehensive whenever a new patient appeared.

On the fourth evening after Batson’s departure, Mrs. Samway was
announced and I prepared myself for the customary snub. But I was
mistaken. Nothing could be more gracious than her manner towards me,
though the object of her visit occasioned me some embarrassment.

“I have called, Dr. Jardine,” she said, “to ask you if you could let
me have the account for poor Mr. Maddock. My husband is the executor,
you know, and, as we shall be going back to Paris quite shortly, he
wants to get everything settled up.”

I was in rather a quandary. Of the financial side of practice I was
absolutely ignorant and I thought it best to say so. “But,” I added,
“Dr. Batson will be back on Friday evening, if you can wait so long.”

“Oh, that will do quite well,” she replied, “but don’t forget to tell
him that we want the account at once.”

I promised not to forget, and then remarked that she would, no doubt,
be glad to be back in Paris.

“No,” she answered, “I shall be rather sorry. Of course Camden Town is
not a very attractive neighbourhood, but it is close to the heart of
London; and then there are some delightful places near and quite
accessible. There is Highgate, for instance.”

“Yes; but it is getting very much built over, isn’t it?”

“Unfortunately it is; but yet there are some very pleasant places
left. The old village is still charming. So quaint and old world. And
then there is Hampstead. What could be more delightful than the Heath?
But perhaps you don’t know Hampstead?”

“Oh, yes I do,” said I; “my rooms are at Gospel Oak, quite near the
Heath, and I think I know every nook and corner of the neighbourhood.
I am pining for a stroll on the Heath at this very moment.”

“I daresay you are,” she said sympathetically. “This is a depressing
neighbourhood if you can’t get away from it. We found it very dismal,
at first, after Paris.”

“Do you live in Paris?” I asked.

“Not permanently,” she replied. “But we spend a good deal of time
there. My husband is a dealer in works of art, so he has to travel
about a good deal. That is how we came to know Mr. Maddock.”

“He was a dealer too, wasn’t he?” I enquired.

“Yes, in a way. But he had means of his own and his dealing was a mere
excuse for collecting things that he was not going to keep. He had a
passion for buying, and then he used to sell the things in order to
buy more. But I am afraid I am detaining you with my chatter?”

“No, not at all,” I said eagerly, only too glad to have an
intelligent, educated person to talk to; “you are the last caller, and
I hope I have finished my day’s work.”

Accordingly she stayed quite a long time, chatting on a variety of
subjects and finally on that of cremation.

“I daresay,” she said, “it is more sanitary and wholesome than burial,
but there is something rather dreadful about it. Perhaps it is because
we are not accustomed to the idea.”

“Did you go to the funeral?” I asked.

“Yes. Mr. Maddock had no friends in England but my husband and me, so
we both went. It was very solemn and awesome. The coffin was laid on
the catafalque while a short service was read, and then two metal
doors opened and it was passed through out of our sight. We waited
some time and presently they brought us a little terra-cotta urn with
just a handful or two of white ash in it. That was all that was left
of our poor friend Septimus Maddock. Don’t you think it is rather
dreadful?”

“Death is always rather dreadful,” I answered. “But when we look at
the ashes of a dead person, we realize the total destruction of the
body; whereas the grave keeps its secrets. If we could look down
through the earth and see the changes that are taking place, we should
probably find the slow decay more shocking than the swift consumption
by fire. Fortunately we cannot. But we know that the final result is
the same in both.”

Mrs. Samway shuddered slightly, and drew her wraps more closely about
her.

“Yes,” she said with a faint sigh; “the same end awaits us all--but it
is better not to think about it.”

We were both silent for awhile. I sat with my gaze bent rather
absently on the case-book before me, turning over her last somewhat
gloomy utterance, until, chancing to look up, I found her pale,
penetrating eyes fixed on me with the same strange intentness that I
had noticed when she had looked at me as I sat by the body of Maddock.
As she met my glance, she looked down quickly but without confusion,
and with a return to her habitual reposefulness.

Half-unconsciously I returned her scrutiny. She was a
remarkable-looking woman. A beautiful woman, too, but of a type that
is, in our time and country, rare: an ancient or barbaric type in
which womanly beauty and grace are joined to manifest physical
strength. I felt that some unusual racial mixture spoke in her
inconsistent colouring; her clear, pink skin, her pale eyes and the
jet-black hair that rippled down either side of her low forehead in
little crimpy waves, as regular and formal as the “archaic curls” of
early Greek sculpture.

But predominant over all other qualities was that of strength. Full
and plump, soft and almost ultra-feminine, lissom and flexible in
every pose and movement, yet, to me, the chief impression that her
appearance suggested was strength--sheer, muscular strength; not the
rigid bull-dog strength of a strong man, but the soft and supple
strength of a leopard. I looked at her as she sat almost limply in her
chair, with her head on one side, her hands resting in her lap and a
beautiful, soft, womanly droop of the shoulders; and I felt that she
could have started up in an instant, active, strong, formidable, like
a roused panther.

I was going on, I think, to make comparisons between her and that
other woman who was wont to trip so daintily down Millfield Lane, when
she raised her eyes slowly to mine; and suddenly she blushed scarlet.

“Am I a _very_ remarkable-looking person, Dr. Jardine?” she asked
quietly, as if answering my thoughts.

The rebuke was well merited. For an instant a paltry compliment
fluttered on my lips; but I swallowed it down. She wasn’t that kind of
woman.

“I am afraid I have been staring you out of countenance, Mrs. Samway,”
I said apologetically.

“Hardly that,” she replied with a smile; “but you certainly were
looking at me very attentively.”

“Well,” I said, recovering myself, “after all, a cat may look at a
king, you know.”

She laughed softly--a very pretty, musical laugh--and rose, still
blushing warmly.

“And so,” she retorted, “by the same reasoning, you think a king may
look at a cat. Very well, Dr. Jardine. Good-night.”

She held out her hand; a beautifully-shaped hand, though rather
large--but, as I have said, she was not a small woman; and as it
clasped mine, though the pressure was quite gentle, it conveyed, like
her appearance, an impression of abundant physical strength.

I accompanied her to the door and watched her as she walked up the
dingy street with an easy, erect, undulating gait; even as might have
walked those women who are portrayed for the wonder of all time on the
ivory-toned marble of the Parthenon frieze. I followed with my eyes
the dignified, graceful figure until it vanished round the corner, and
then went back to the consulting-room dimly wondering why a woman of
such manifest beauty and charm should offer so little attraction to
me.

Batson’s practice, among its other drawbacks, suffered from a deadly
lack of professional interest. Whether this was its normal condition,
or whether his patients had got wind of me and called in other and
more experienced practitioners, I know not; but certainly, after the
stirring work of the hospital, the cases that I had to deal with
seemed very small beer. Hence the prospect of a genuine surgical case
came as a grateful surprise and I hailed it with enthusiasm.

It was on the day before Batson’s expected return that I received the
summons; which was delivered to me in a dirty envelope as I sat by the
bedside of the last patient on my list.

“Is the messenger waiting?” I asked, tearing open the envelope.

“No, Doctor. He just handed in the note and went off. He seemed to be
in a hurry.”

I ran my eye over the message, scrawled in a rather illiterate hand on
a sheet of common notepaper, and read:


 “Sir,

 “Will you please come at once to the Mineral Water Works in Norton
 Street. One of our men has injured himself rather badly.

                                               “Yours truly,
                                               “J. Parker.

 “P.S.--He is bleeding a good deal, so please come quick.”


The postscript gave a very necessary piece of information. An injury
which bled would require certain dressings and surgical appliances
over and above those contained in my pocket case; and to obtain these
I should have to take Batson’s house on the way. Slipping the note
into my pocket, I wished my patient a hasty adieu and strode off at a
swinging pace in the direction of Jacob Street.

The housemaid, Maggie, helped me to find the dressings and pack the
bag--for she was a handy, intelligent girl though no beauty; and
meanwhile I questioned her as to the whereabouts of Norton Street and
the mineral water factory.

“Oh, I know the place well enough, sir,” said she, “though I didn’t
know the works were open. Norton Street is only a few minutes’ walk
from here. It’s quite close to Gayton Street, in fact these works are
just at the back of the Samways’ house. You go up to the corner by the
market and take the second on the right and then--”

“Look here, Maggie,” I interrupted, “you’d better come and show me the
way, as you know the place. There’s no time to waste on fumbling for
the right turning.”

“Very well, sir,” she replied, and the bag being now packed with all
necessary instruments and dressings, we set forth together.

“Is this a large factory?” I asked, as she trotted by my side, to the
astonished admiration of Jacob Street, and the neighbourhood in
general.

“No, sir,” she replied. “It’s quite a small place. The last people
went bankrupt and the works were empty and to let for a long time. I
thought they were still to let, but I suppose somebody has taken them
and started the business afresh. It’s round here.”

She piloted me round a corner into a narrow by-street, near the end of
which she halted at the gate of a yard or mews. Above the entrance was
a weather-beaten board bearing the inscription, “International Mineral
Water Company” and a half-defaced printed bill offering the premises
to let; and at the side was a large bell-pull. A vigorous tug at the
latter set a bell jangling within, and, as Maggie tripped away up the
street, a small wicket in the gate opened, disclosing the dimly-seen
figure of a man standing in the inner darkness.

“Are you the doctor?” he inquired.

I answered “Yes,” and, being thereupon bidden to enter, stepped
through the opening of the wicket, which the man immediately closed,
shutting out the last gleam of light from the street lamp outside.

“It’s rather dark,” said the unseen custodian, taking me by the arm.

“It is indeed,” I replied, groping with my feet over the rough
cobbles; “hadn’t you better get a light of some kind?”

“I will in a minute,” was the reply. “You see, all the other men have
gone home. We close at six sharp. This is the way. I’ll strike a
match. The man is down in the bottling-room.”

My conductor struck a match by the light of which he guided me through
a doorway, along a passage or corridor and down a flight of stone
steps. At the bottom of the steps was a flagged passage, out of which
opened what looked like a range of cellars. Along the passage I walked
warily, followed by the stranger and lighted, very imperfectly, by the
matches that he struck; the glimmer of which threw a gigantic and
ghostly shadow of myself on the stone floor, but failed utterly to
pierce the darkness ahead. I was exactly opposite the yawning doorway
of one of the cellars when the match went out, and the man behind me
exclaimed:

“Wait a moment, Doctor! Don’t move until I strike another light.”

I halted abruptly; and the next moment I received a violent thrust
that sent me staggering through the open doorway into the cellar.
Instantly, the massive door slammed and a pair of heavy bolts were
shot in succession on the outside.

“What the devil is the meaning of this?” I roared, battering and
kicking furiously at the door. Of course, there was no answer, and I
quickly stopped my demonstrations, for it dawned on me in a moment
that the factory was untenanted save by the ruffian who had admitted
me; that I had been decoyed here of a set purpose, though what that
purpose was I could not imagine.

But it was not long before I received a pretty broad hint as to the
immediate intentions of my host. A gentle thumping at the door of my
cellar attracted my attention and caused me to lay my ear against the
wood. The sound that I heard was quite unmistakable. The crevices of
the door were being filled, apparently with pieces of rag, which my
friend was ramming home, presumably with a chisel. In fact the door
was being “caulked” to make the joints airtight.

The object of this proceeding was clear enough. I was shut up in an
air-tight cavity in which I was to be slowly suffocated. That was
quite obvious. Why was I to be suffocated, I could form no sort of
guess excepting that I had fallen into the hands of a homicidal
lunatic. But I was not greatly alarmed. The air in a good-sized cellar
will last a considerable time, and I could easily poke out anything
that my friend might stuff into the keyhole. Then, when the men
arrived in the morning, I could kick on the cellar door, and they
would come and let me out. There was nothing to be particularly
frightened about.

But stay! Were there any men? The injured man was evidently a myth.
Supposing the other men were a myth too! I recalled Maggie’s remark,
that she “had thought the place was to let still.” Perhaps it was.
That would be rather more serious.

At this point my cogitations were broken in upon by sounds from the
adjoining cellar; the sound of someone moving about and dragging some
heavy body. And it struck me at once as strange that I should hear
these sounds so distinctly, seeing the massive door of my own cellar
was closely sealed and the walls were of solid brick, as I ascertained
by rapping at them with my knuckles. But I had no time to consider
this circumstance, for there suddenly arose a new sound, whereat, I
must confess my heart fairly came into my mouth; a loud, penetrating
hiss like the shriek of escaping steam. It seemed to come from some
part of the cellar in which I was immured; from a spot nearly
overhead; and it was immediately echoed by a similar sound in the
adjoining cellar and then by a third. Even as the last sound broke
forth, the door of the adjoining cellar slammed, the bolts were shot
and then faintly mingled with the discordant hissing, I could hear the
dull thumping that told me that the cracks of that door, too, were
being caulked.

It was a frightful situation. The hissing sound was obviously caused
by the escape of gas under high pressure, and that gas must be
entering my cellar through some opening. I felt for my match-box, and,
groping along the wall towards the point whence the loudest
sound--and, indeed, all the sounds--proceeded, I struck a match. The
glimmer of the wax vesta made everything clear. Close to the ceiling,
about seven feet from the ground, was an opening in the wall about six
inches square; and pouring through this in a continuous stream was a
cloud of white particles that glistened like snowflakes. As I stood
under the opening, some of them settled on my face; and the more than
icy coldness of the contact, told the whole, horrible tale in a
moment.

This white powder _was_ snow--carbonic acid snow. The hissing sound
came from three of those great iron bottles, charged under pressure
with liquefied carbonic acid, which are used by mineral water
manufacturers for aërating the water. The miscreant (or lunatic) who
had imprisoned me had turned on the taps, and the liquid was escaping
and congealing into snow with the cold produced by its own rapid
evaporation and expansion. Of course the snow would quickly absorb
heat, and, without again liquefying, evaporate into the gaseous form.
In a very short time both cellars would be full of the poisonous gas,
and I--well, in a word, I was shut up in a lethal chamber.

It has taken me some time to write this explanation, which, however,
flashed through my brain in the twinkling of an eye as the light of
the match fell on that sinister cloud of snowflakes. In a moment I had
my coat off, and was stuffing it for dear life into the opening. It
was but a poor protection against the gas, which would easily enough
find its way through the interstices of the fabric; but it would stop
the direct stream of snow and give me time to think.

On what incalculable chances do the great issues of our lives depend!
If I had been a short man I must have been dead in half an hour; for
the opening through which the cloud of snow was pouring was well over
seven feet above the floor and would have been quite out of my reach.
Even as it was, with my six feet of stature and corresponding length
of arm, it was impossible to ram my coat into the opening with the
necessary force, for I had to stand close to the wall with my arm
upraised at a great mechanical disadvantage. Still, as I have said,
imperfect as the obstruction was, it served to stop the inrushing
cloud of snow. It would take some time for the heavy gas in the
adjoining cellar to rise to the level of the opening, and, meanwhile,
I could be devising other measures.

I lit another match and looked about me. The cellar was much smaller
than I had thought and was absolutely empty. The floor was of
concrete, the walls of rough brickwork and the ceiling of plaster, all
cracked and falling in. There was plenty of ventilation there, but
that was of no interest to me. Carbonic acid gas is so heavy that it
behaves almost like a liquid, and it would have filled the cellar and
suffocated me even if the top of my prison had been open to the sky.
The adjoining cellar was already filling rapidly, and when the gas in
it reached the level of the opening, it would percolate through my
coat and come pouring down into my cellar. But that, as I have said,
would take some time--if the dividing wall was moderately sound. This
important qualification, as soon as it occurred to me, set me
exploring the wall with the aid of another match; and very
unsatisfactory was the result. It was a bad wall, built of inferior
brick and worse mortar, and was marked by innumerable holes where
wall-hooks and other fastenings had been driven in between the bricks.
My brief survey convinced me that, so far from being gas-tight, the
wall was as pervious as a sponge, and that whatever I meant to do to
preserve my life, I must set about without delay.

But what was I to do? That was the urgent, the vital question. Escape
was evidently impossible. There were no means of stopping up the
numberless holes and weak places in the wall. The only vulnerable spot
was the door. If I could establish some communication with the outer
air, I could, for a time at least, disregard the poisonous gas with
which I should presently be surrounded.

The first thing to be considered was the keyhole. That must be
unstopped at once. Fumbling in my bag--for I had grown of a sudden
niggardly with my matches--I found a good-sized probe, which I
insinuated into the keyhole; and, in a moment, my hopes in that
direction were extinguished. For the end of the probe impinged upon
metal. The keyhole was not stopped with rag, but with a plate of metal
fixed on the outside. With rapidly-growing alarm, but with a tidiness
born of habit, I put the probe back in the bag and began feverishly to
review the situation and consider my resources. And then I had an
idea, only a poor, forlorn hope, but still an idea.

There is a certain ingenious type of pocket-knife, devised principally
in the interest of the cutlery trade, that innocent persons (usually
of the female persuasion) are wont to bestow as presents on their
masculine friends. Such a knife I chanced to possess. It had been
given to me by an aunt, and sentimental considerations had induced me
to give it an amount of room in my trousers’ pocket that I continually
grudged. However, there it was at this critical moment, with its
corkscrew, gimlet, its bewildering array of blades, its hoof-pick,
tooth-pick, tweezers, file, screw-driver and assorted unclassifiable
tools; a ponderous lump of pocket-destroying uselessness--and yet, the
appointed means of saving my life.

The gimlet was the first tool that I called into requisition. Very
gingerly--for these tools are commonly over-tempered and brittle--I
bored in the thick plank a hole at about the level of my mouth; and as
I worked I turned over my further plans. When the gimlet was through
the door, I selected a tool on whose use I had often speculated--a
sharp-edged spike, like a diminutive and very stumpy bayonet--which I
proceeded to use broach-wise to enlarge the hole. When this tool
worked loose, I exchanged it for the screw-driver, with which I
managed to broach the hole out to about half an inch in width. And
this was as large as I could make it, and it was not large enough.
True, one could breathe fairly comfortably through a half-inch hole,
but, with the deadly gas circulating around, a freer opening was very
desirable.

Then I bethought me that the magic knife contained a saw--a wretched,
thick-bladed affair, but still a saw--which would actually cut wood if
you gave it time. This implement suggested a simple plan which I
forthwith put into execution, working as rapidly as I could without
running the risk of breaking the tools. My plan was to make a second
hole some two inches diagonally below the first, and from each hole to
carry two saw-cuts at right angles to one another. The two pairs of
cuts would intersect and take a square piece out of the door, giving
me a little window through which I could breathe in comfort.

It was a trifling task, but yet, with the miserable tools I had, it
took a considerable time to execute; the more since the saw blade was
wider than the holes, excepting at its point. However, it was
accomplished at last, and I had the satisfaction of pushing out the
little separated square of wood and feeling that I now had free access
to the pure air outside my dungeon.

But it was none too soon. As I rested from my labours, it occurred to
me to test the condition of the air inside. Lighting a wax match, I
held the little taper so that the flame ascended steadily, and then
lowered it slowly. As it descended the flame changed colour somewhat,
and about eighteen inches from the floor it went out quite suddenly.
There was, then, a layer of the pure gas about eighteen inches deep
covering the floor, and, no doubt, rising pretty rapidly.

This was rather startling, and it warned me to have recourse without
delay to my breathing hole. For though carbonic acid gas behaves
somewhat as a liquid, it is not a liquid: like other gases, it has the
power of diffusing upwards, and the air of the cellar must be already
getting unsafe. Accordingly, after carefully wiping the surface of the
door with my handkerchief, I applied my mouth, with some distaste, to
the opening and took in a deep draught of undoubtedly pure air.

The position in which I had to stand with my mouth to the hole was an
irksome one, and I foresaw that it would presently become very
fatiguing. Moreover, when the gas reached the level of my head, it
would be difficult to prevent some of it from finding its way into my
mouth and nostrils; and if it did, I should most assuredly be
poisoned. This consideration suggested the necessity of making another
hole at a lower level to let out the gas and allow me to rest myself
by a change of position. But this new task had to be carried out with
my mouth glued to the breathing hole; and very awkward and tiring I
found it and very slow was the progress that I made. This second hole
was smaller than the first, for time was precious, and I reflected
that I could easily enlarge it by fresh saw-cuts, each two of which
would take out a triangular piece of wood.

But it was tedious work, and its completion left me with aching arms;
indeed, I was beginning to ache all over from the constrained
position. Taking a deep breath and shutting my mouth, I stood up and
stretched myself. Then I lit a match and looked at my watch. Half-past
eight. I had been over two hours in the cellar. And meanwhile the
patients were waiting for me at the surgery, and, no doubt, murmuring
at the delay. How soon would my absence lead to enquiries? Or were
enquiries being made even now?

Looking at the match that I still held in my hand, I noticed that its
flame was pallid and bluish; and as I lowered it slowly, it went out
when it was a little over two feet from the floor. The gas, then, was
still rising, though not so rapidly as I had feared, but from the
altered colour of the flame, it was evident that the air of the
cellar, generally, contained enough diffused gas to be actively
poisonous.

After a time, the erect position began to grow insupportably
fatiguing. I felt that I must sit down for a few minutes’ rest, even
though prudence whispered that it was highly unsafe. I struggled for
awhile, but eventually, conquered by fatigue, sat down on the floor
with my mouth applied closely to the lower breathing-hole. I persuaded
myself that I would sit only just long enough to recover some of my
strength, but minute after minute sped by and still I felt an
unaccountable reluctance to rise.

Suddenly I became conscious of a vague feeling of drowsiness; of a
desire to lean back against the wall and doze. It was only slight, but
its significance was so appalling that I scrambled to my feet in a
panic, and, putting my mouth to the upper breathing-hole, took several
deep inspirations. But I soon realized that the upright position was
impossible. The drowsy feeling continued and there was growing with it
a lassitude and weakness of the limbs that threatened to leave me only
the choice between sitting or falling. A wave of furious anger swept
over me and roused me a little; a burst of hatred of the cowardly
wretch who had decoyed me, as I now suspected, to my death. Then this
feeling passed and was succeeded by chilly fear, and I sank down once
more into a sitting position with my mouth pressed to the lower
opening.

The time ran on unreckoned by me. Gradually, by imperceptible degrees,
my mental state grew more and yet more sluggish. Anger and fear and
ever-dwindling hope flitted by turns across the slowly-fading field of
my consciousness. Intervals of quiet indifference--almost of placid
comfort--began to intervene, with increasing lassitude and a growing
desire for rest. To lie down; that was what I wanted. To lay my head
upon the stony floor and sink into sweet oblivion.

At last I must have actually dozed, though, fortunately, without
removing my mouth from the breathing-hole, for I had no sense of the
passage of time, when I was suddenly aroused by the loud and
continuous jangling of a bell.

I listened with a sort of dull eagerness and keeping awake with a
conscious effort.

The bell pealed wildly and without a pause for what seemed to me quite
a long time.

Then it ceased, and again my consciousness began to grow dim. After an
interval, I know not how long, there came to me dimly and only
half-perceived, the closing of a door, the patter of quick footsteps,
and then the voice of a man calling me by name.

I struggled to get on to my feet, but could not move. But I still held
the clasp-knife and was able to rap with it feebly on the door. Again
I heard the voice--it sounded nearer now, and yet infinitely far
away--and again I rapped on the door and shouted through the
breathing-hole; a thin, muffled cry, such as one utters in a troubled
dream. And then the drowsiness crept over me again and I heard no
more.

The next thing of which I was conscious was a sounding thwack on the
cheek with something wet that felt like a dead fish. I opened my eyes
and looked vaguely into two faces that were close to mine and seemed
to be lighted by a lamp or candle. The faces were somehow familiar,
but yet I failed clearly to recognize them, and, after staring
stupidly for a few moments, I began to doze again. Then the dead fish
returned to the assault and I again opened my eyes. Another vigorous
flop caused me to open my mouth with an unparliamentary gasp.

“Ah! That’s better,” said a familiar and yet “unplaced” voice. “When a
man is able to swear, he is fairly on the road to recovery.” Flop!

The renewed attentions of the dead fish (which turned out, later, to
be merely a wet towel) evoked further demonstrations on my part of
progressing recovery, accompanied by a nervous titter in a female
voice. Gradually the clouds rolled away, and to my returning
consciousness, the faces revealed themselves as those of Maggie, the
housemaid, and Dr. Thorndyke. Even to my muddled wits, the presence of
the latter was somewhat of a puzzle, and, in the intervals of
anathematizing the deceased fish--which I had not yet identified--I
found myself hazily speculating on the problem of how my revered
teacher came to be in this place, and what place this was.

“Come, now, Jardine,” said Dr. Thorndyke, emptying a jug of water on
my face, and receiving a volley of spluttered expletives in exchange,
“pull yourself together. How did you get in that cellar?”

“Hang’ ’f I know,” said I, composing myself for another nap. But here
the wet towel came once more into requisition, and that with such
vigour that, in a fit of exasperation, I sat up and yawned.

“I think you’d better fetch a cab,” said Thorndyke, as Maggie wrung
out the towel afresh; “but leave the gate open when you go out.”

“Wasser cab for?” I asked sulkily. “Can’t I walk?”

“If you can, it will be better,” said Thorndyke. “Let us see if you
are able to stand.” He hoisted me on to my feet and he and Maggie,
taking each an arm, walked me slowly up and down the cobbled yard,
which I now began to recognize as appertaining to the Mineral Water
Works. At first I staggered very drunkenly, but by degrees the drowsy
feeling wore off and I was able to walk with Thorndyke’s assistance
only.

“I think we might venture out now,” said he, at length, piloting me
towards the gate, and when I had stumbled rather awkwardly through the
wicket, we set forth homeward.

On my arrival home, Thorndyke ordered a supply of strong coffee and a
light meal, after which--it being obvious that I was good for nothing
in a professional sense, he suggested that I should go to bed.

“Don’t worry about the practice,” said he. “I will send for my friend
Jervis, and, between us, we will see that everything is looked after.
If Maggie will give me a sheet of paper and an envelope I will write a
note to him; and then she can take a hansom to my chambers and give
the note either to Dr. Jervis or my man Polton. Meanwhile, I will stay
here and see that you don’t go to sleep prematurely.”

He wrote the note; and Maggie, having made such improvements in her
outward garb as befitted the status of a rider in hansoms, took charge
of it and departed with much satisfaction and dignity. Thorndyke made
a few enquiries of me as to the circumstances that had led to my
incarceration in the cellar, but finding that I knew no more than
Maggie--whom he had already questioned--he changed the subject; nor
would he allow me again to refer to it.

“No, Jardine,” he said. “Better think no more of it for the present.
Have a good night’s rest and then, if you are all right in the
morning, we will go into the matter and see if we can put the puzzle
together.”




 CHAPTER VI.
 A COUNCIL OF WAR

I awoke somewhat late on the following morning; indeed, I was but
half awake when there came a somewhat masterful and peremptory tap at
my bedroom door, followed by the appearance in the room of a rather
tall gentleman of some thirty years of age. I should have diagnosed
him instantly as a doctor by his self-possessed, proprietary manner of
entering, but he left me no time for guessing as to his identity.

“Good-morning, Jardine,” he said briskly, jingling the keys and small
change in his trousers’ pockets, “my name is Jervis. Second violin in
the Thorndyke orchestra. I’m in charge here _pro tem_. How are you
feeling?”

“Oh, I’m all right. I was just going to get up. You needn’t trouble
about the practice. I’m quite fit.”

“I’m glad to hear it,” said Jervis, “but you’d better keep quiet all
the same. My orders are explicit, and I know my place too well to
disobey. Thorndyke’s instructions were that you are not to make any
visits or go abroad until after the inquest.”

“Inquest?” I exclaimed.

“Yes. He’s coming here at four o’clock to hold an inquiry into the
circumstances that led to your being locked up in a cellar, and until
then I’m to look after the practice and keep an eye on you. What time
do you expect the offspring of the flittermouse?”

“Who?” I demanded.

“Batson. He’s coming back to-day, isn’t he?”

“Yes. About six o’clock to-night.”

“Then you’ll be able to clear out. So much the better. The
neighbourhood doesn’t seem very wholesome for you.”

“I suppose I can do the surgery work,” said I.

“You’d better not. Better follow Thorndyke’s instructions literally.
But you can tell me about the patients and help me to dispense. And
that reminds me that a person named Samway called just now, a rather
fine-looking woman--reminded me of a big, sleek tabby cat. She
wouldn’t say what she wanted. Do you know anything about her?”

“I expect she came about her account. But she’ll have to see Batson. I
told her so, only a night or two ago.”

“Very well,” said Jervis, “then I’ll be off now, and you take things
easy and just think over what happened last night, so as to be ready
for Thorndyke.”

With this he bustled away, leaving me to rise and breakfast at my
leisure.

His advice to me to think over the events of the previous night was
rather superfluous. The experience was not one that I was likely to
forget. To have escaped from death by the very slenderest chance was
in itself a matter to occupy one’s thoughts pretty completely, apart
from the horrible circumstances, and then there was the mystery in
which the whole affair was enveloped, a mystery which utterly baffled
any attempt to penetrate it. Turn it over as I would--and it was
hardly out of my thoughts for a minute at a time all day--no glimmer
of light could I perceive, no faintest clue to any explanation of that
hideous and incomprehensible crime.

At four o’clock punctually to the minute, Dr. Thorndyke arrived, and,
having quickly looked me over to see that I was none the worse for my
adventure, proceeded to business.

“Have you finished the visits, Jervis?” he asked.

“Yes; and sent off all the medicine. There’s nothing more to do until
six.”

“Then,” said Thorndyke, “we might have a cup of tea in the
consulting-room and talk this affair over. I am rather taking
possession of you, Jardine,” he added, “but I think we ought to see
where we are quite clearly, even if we decide finally to hand the case
over to the police. Don’t you agree with me?”

“Certainly,” I agreed, highly flattered by the interest he was taking
in my affairs; “naturally, I should like to get to the bottom of the
mystery.”

“So should I,” said he, “and to that end, I propose that you give us a
completely circumstantial account of the whole affair. I have had a
talk with your very intelligent little maid, Maggie, and now I want to
hear what happened after she left you.”

“I don’t think I have much to tell that you don’t know,” said I;
“however, I will take up the story where Maggie left off,” and I
proceeded to describe the events in detail, much as I have related
them to the reader.

Thorndyke listened to my story with profound attention, making an
occasional memorandum but not uttering a word until I had finished.
Then, after a rapid glance through his memoranda, he said:

“You spoke of a note that was handed in to you. Have you got that
note?”

“I left it on the writing-table, and it is probably there still. Yes,
here it is.” I brought it over to the little table on which our tea
was laid and handed it to him; and as he took it from me with the
dainty carefulness of a photographer handling a wet plate, I noted
mentally that the habit of delicate manipulation contracted in the
laboratory makes itself evident in the most trifling of everyday
actions.

“I see,” he remarked, turning the envelope over and scrutinizing it
minutely, “that this is addressed to ‘Dr. H. Jardine.’ It appears,
then, that he knows your Christian name. Can you account for that?”

“No, I can’t. The only letter I have had here was addressed ‘Dr.
Jardine,’ and I have signed no certificates or other documents.”

He made a note of my answer, and, drawing the missive from its
envelope, read it through.

“The handwriting,” he remarked, “looks disguised rather than
illiterate, and the diction is inconsistent. The blatantly incorrect
adverb at the end does not agree with the rest of the phraseology and
the correct punctuation. As to the signature, we may neglect that,
unless you are acquainted with anyone in these parts of the name of
Parker.”

“I am not,” said I.

“Very well. Then if you will allow me to keep this note, I will file
it for future reference. And now I will ask you a few questions about
this adventure of yours, which is really a most astonishing and
mysterious affair; even more mysterious, I may add, than it looks at
the first glance. But we shall come to that presently. At the moment
we are concerned with the crime itself--with a manifest attempt to
murder you--and the circumstances that led up to it; and there are
certain obvious questions that suggest themselves. The first is: Can
you give any explanation of this attempt on your life?”

“No, I can’t,” I replied. “It is a complete mystery to me. I can only
suppose that the fellow was a homicidal lunatic.”

“A homicidal lunatic,” said Thorndyke, “is the baffled investigator’s
last resource. But we had better not begin supposing at this stage.
Let us keep strictly to facts. You do not know of anything that would
explain this attack on you?”

“No.”

“Then the next question is: Had you any property of value on your
person?”

“No. Five pounds would cover the value of everything I had about me,
including the instruments.”

“Then that seems to exclude robbery as a motive. The next question is:
Does any person stand to benefit considerably by your death? Have you
any considerable expectations in the way of bequests, reversions or
succession to landed property or titles?”

“No,” I replied with a faint grin. “I shall come in for a thousand or
two when my uncle dies, but I believe the London Hospital is the
alternative legatee, and I suppose we would hardly suspect the
hospital governors of this little affair. Otherwise, the only person
who would benefit by my death would be the undertaker who got the
contract to plant me.”

Thorndyke nodded and made a note of my answer.

“That,” said he, “disposes of the principal motives for premeditated
murder. There remains the question of personal enmity--not a common
motive in this country. Have you, as far as you know, an enemy or
enemies who might conceivably try to kill you?”

“As far as I know, I have not an enemy in the world, or anyone, even,
who would wish to do me a bad turn.”

“Then,” said Thorndyke, “that seems to dispose of all the ordinary
motives for murder; and I may say that I have only put these questions
as a matter of routine precaution--_ex abundantiâ cautelae_, as
Jervis says, when he is in a forensic mood--because certain other
facts which I have learned seem to exclude any of these motives
except, perhaps, robbery from the person.”

“You haven’t been long picking up those other facts,” remarked Jervis.
“Why the affair only happened last night.”

“I have only made a few simple enquiries,” replied Thorndyke. “This
morning I called on Mr. Highfield, whose name, as solicitor and agent
to the landlords, I copied from the notice on the gate at the works
last night. He knows me slightly so I was able to get from him the
information that I wanted. It amounts to this.

“About four months ago, a Mr. Gill wrote to him and offered a lump sum
for the use of the mineral water works for six months. Highfield
accepted the offer and drew up an agreement, as desired, granting Gill
immediate possession of the premises and the small stock and plant, of
which the residue was to be taken back at a valuation by the landlords
at the expiration of the term.

“I noted Gill’s address, as it appeared on the agreement, and sent my
man, Polton, to make enquiries. The address is that of a West
Kensington lodging house at which Gill was staying when he signed the
agreement. He had been there only three weeks, he left two days after
the date of the agreement and the landlady does not know where he went
or anything about him.”

“Sounds a bit fishy,” Jervis remarked. “Did he tell Highfield what he
wanted the premises for?”

“I understand that something was said about some assay work in
connection with certain--or rather uncertain--mineral concessions. But
of course that was no affair of Highfield’s. His business was to get
the rent, and, having got it, his interest in Mr. Gill lapsed. But you
see the bearing of these facts. Gill’s connection with these works
does, as Jervis says, look a little queer, especially after what has
happened. But, seeing that he made his arrangements four months ago,
at a time when Jardine had no thought of coming into this
neighbourhood, it is clear that those arrangements could have no
connection with this particular attempt. Gill obviously did not take
those works with the intention of murdering Jardine. He took them for
some other purpose; quite possibly the purpose that he stated. And we
must not assume that Gill was the perpetrator of this outrage at all.
Could you identify the man who let you in?”

“No,” I replied. “Certainly not. I hardly saw him at all. The place
was pitch dark, and whenever he struck a match he was either behind me
or in front with his back to me. The only thing I could make out about
him was that he had some sort of coarse wash-leather gloves on.”

“Ha!” exclaimed Thorndyke. “Then we were right, Jervis.”

I looked in surprise from one to the other of my friends, and was on
the point of asking Thorndyke what he meant, when he continued.

“That closes another track. If you couldn’t identify the man, a
description of Gill, if we could obtain it, would not help us. We must
begin at some other point.”

“It seems to me,” said Jervis, “that we haven’t much to go upon at
all.”

“We haven’t much,” agreed Thorndyke, “but still we have something. We
find that the motive of this attempt was apparently not robbery, nor
the diversion of inheritable property, nor personal enmity. It must
have been premeditated, but yet it could not have been planned more
than a week in advance, for Jardine has only been in this
neighbourhood for that time, and his coming was unexpected. The
appearances very strongly suggest that the motive, whatever it was,
has been generated recently and probably locally. So we had better
make a start from that assumption.”

“Is it possible,” Jervis suggested, “that this man Gill may be some
sort of anarchist crank? Or a sort of thug? It is actually conceivable
that he may have taken these premises for the express purpose of
having a secure place where he could perpetrate murders and conceal
the bodies.”

“It is quite conceivable,” said Thorndyke, “and when we go and look
over the works--which I propose we do presently--we may as well bear
the possibility in mind. But it is merely a speculative suggestion. To
return to your affairs, Jardine, has your stay here been quite
uneventful?”

“Perfectly,” I replied.

“No unusual or obscure cases? No injuries?”

“No, nothing out of the common,” I replied.

“No deaths?”

“One. But the man died before I took over.”

“Nothing unusual about that? Everything quite regular?”

“Oh, perfectly,” I answered; and then with a sudden qualm, as I
recalled Batson’s uncertainty as to the actual cause of death, I
added, “At least I hope so.”

“You hope so?” queried Thorndyke.

“Yes. Because it’s too late to go into the question now. The man was
cremated.”

At this a singular silence fell. Both my friends seemed to stiffen in
their chairs, and both looked at me silently but very attentively.
Then Thorndyke asked, “Did you have anything to do with that case?”

“Yes,” I replied. “I went with Batson to examine the body.”

“And are you perfectly satisfied that everything was as it should be?”

I was on the point of saying “yes.” And then suddenly there arose
before my eyes the vision of Mrs. Samway looking at me over Batson’s
shoulder with that strange, inscrutable expression. And again, I
recalled her unexplained anger and then her sudden change of mood. It
had impressed me uncomfortably at the time, and it impressed me
uncomfortably now.

“I don’t know that I am, now that I come to think it over,” I replied.

“Why not?” asked Thorndyke.

“Well,” I said, a little hesitatingly, “to begin with, I don’t think
the cause of death was quite clear. Batson couldn’t find anything
definite when he attended the man, and I know that the patient’s death
came as quite a surprise.”

“But surely,” exclaimed Thorndyke, “he took some measures to find out
the cause of death!”

“He didn’t. He assumed that it was a case of fatty heart and certified
it as ‘Morbus cordis’; and a man named O’Connor confirmed his
certificate after examining the body.”

“After merely inspecting the exterior?”

“Yes.”

My two friends looked at one another significantly, and Thorndyke
remarked, with a disapproving shake of the head:

“And this is what all the elaborate precautions amount to in practice.
A case which might have been one of the crudest and baldest poisoning
gets passed with hardly a pretence of scrutiny. And so it will always
be. Routine precautions against the unsuspected are no precautions at
all. That is the danger of cremation. It restores to the poisoner the
security that he enjoyed in the old days when there were no such
sciences as toxicology and organic chemistry, when it was impossible
for him to be tripped up by an exhumation and an analysis.”

“You don’t think it likely that this was a case of poisoning, do you?”
I asked.

“I know nothing about the case,” he replied, “excepting that there was
gross neglect in issuing the certificates. What do you think about it
yourself? Looking back at the case, is there anything besides the
uncertainty that strikes you as unsatisfactory?”

I hesitated, and again the figure of Mrs. Samway rose before me with
that strange, baleful look in her eyes. Finally I described the
incident to my colleagues.

“Mrs. Samway!” exclaimed Jervis. “Is that the handsome Lucrezia Borgia
lady with the mongoose eyes who called here this morning? By Jove!
Jardine, you are giving me the creeps.”

“I understand,” said Thorndyke, “that you were making as if to feel
the dead man’s pulse?”

“Yes.”

“There is no doubt, I suppose, that he really was dead?”

“None whatever. He was as cold as a fish, and, besides there was quite
distinct _rigor mortis_.”

“That seems conclusive enough,” said Thorndyke, but he continued to
gaze at his open note-book with a profoundly speculative and
thoughtful expression.

“It certainly looks,” said Jervis, “as if Jardine had either seen
something or had been about to see something that he was not wanted to
see; and the question is what that something could have been.”

“Yes,” I agreed, gloomily; “that is what I have just been asking
myself. There might have been a wound or injury of some kind, or there
might have been the marks of a hypodermic needle on the wrist. I wish
I knew what she meant by looking at me in that way.”

“Well,” said Jervis, “we shall never know now. The grave gives up its
secrets now and again, but the crematorium furnace never. Whether he
died naturally or was murdered, Mr. Maddock is now a little heap of
ashes with no message for anyone this side of the Day of Judgment.”

Thorndyke looked up. “That seems to be so,” said he, “and really, we
have no substantial reasons for thinking that there was anything
wrong. So we come back to your own affairs, Jardine, and the question
is, What would you prefer to do?”

“In what respect?” I asked.

“In regard to this attempt on your life. You have told us that you
have not an enemy in the world. But it appears as if you had; and a
very dangerous one, too. Now would you like to put the case into the
hands of the police, or would you rather that we kept our own counsel
and looked into it ourselves?”

“I should like you to decide that,” said I.

“The reason that I ask,” said Thorndyke, “is this: the machinery of
the police is adjusted to professional crime--burglary, coining,
forgery, and so forth--and their methods are mostly based on
‘information received.’ The professional ‘crook’ is generally well
known to the police, and, when wanted for any particular ‘job,’ can be
found without much difficulty and the information necessary for his
conviction obtained from the usual sources. But in cases of obscure,
non-professional crime the police are at a disadvantage. The criminal
is unknown to them; there are no confederates from whom to get
information; consequently they have no starting-point for their
enquiries. They can’t create clues; and they, very naturally, will not
devote time, labour and money to cases in which they have nothing to
go on.

“Now this affair of yours does not look like a professional crime. No
motive is evident and you can give no information that would help the
police. I doubt if they would do much more than give you some rather
disagreeable publicity, and they might even suspect you of some kind
of imposture.”

“Gad!” I exclaimed. “That’s just what they would do. It’s what they
did last time, and this affair would write me down in their eyes a
confirmed mystery-monger.”

“Last time?” queried Thorndyke. “What last time is that? Have there
been any other attempts?”

“Not on me,” I replied. “But I had an adventure one night about six or
seven weeks ago that has made the Hampstead police look on me, I
think, with some suspicion”; and here I gave my two friends a
description of my encounter with the dead (or insensible) cleric in
Millfield Lane, and my discoveries on the following morning.

“But my dear Jardine!” Thorndyke exclaimed when I had finished, “what
an extraordinary man you are! It seems as if you could hardly show
your nose out of doors without becoming involved in some dark and
dreadful mystery.”

“Well,” said I, “I hope I have now exhausted my gifts in that respect.
I am not thirsting for more experiences. But what do you think about
that Hampstead affair? Do you think I could possibly have been
mistaken? Could the man have been merely insensible, after all, as the
police suggested?”

Thorndyke shook his head. “I don’t think,” he replied, “that it is
possible to take that view. You see the man had disappeared. Now he
could not have got away unassisted, in fact he could not have walked
at all. One would have to assume that some persons appeared directly
after you left and carried him away; and that they appeared and
retired so quickly as not to be overtaken by you on your return a few
minutes later with the police. That is assuming too much. And then
there are the traces which you discovered on the following day, which
seem to suggest strongly that a body had been carried away to Ken
Wood. It is a thousand pities that you encountered that keeper, if you
could have followed the tracks while they were fresh you might have
been able to ascertain whither it had been carried. But now, to return
to your latest experience, what shall we do? Shall we communicate with
the police, or shall we make a few investigations on our own account?”

“As far as I am concerned,” I replied eagerly, “a private
investigation would be greatly preferable. But wouldn’t it take up
rather a lot of your time?”

“Now, Jardine, you needn’t apologize,” said Jervis. “Unless I am much
mistaken, my respected senior has ‘struck soundings,’ as the nautical
phrase has it. He has a theory of your case, and he would like to see
it through. Isn’t that so, Thorndyke?”

“Well,” Thorndyke admitted, “I will confess that the case piques my
curiosity somewhat. It is an unusual affair and suggests some curious
hypotheses which might be worth testing. So, if you agree, Jardine,
that we make at least a few preliminary investigations, I suggest
that, as soon as Batson returns, we three go over to what the
newspapers would call ‘the scene of the tragedy’ and reconstitute the
affair on the spot.”

“And what about Batson?” I asked. “Shall we tell him anything?”

“I think we must,” said Thorndyke, “if only to put him on his guard;
for your unknown enemy may be his enemy, too.”

At this moment the street door banged loudly, a quick step danced
along the hall, and Batson himself burst into the room.

“Good Lord!” he exclaimed, halting abruptly at the door and gazing in
dismay at our little council. “What’s the matter? Anything happened?”

Thorndyke laughed as he shook the hand of his quondam pupil.

“Come, come, Batson,” said he, “don’t make me out such a bird of
ill-omen.”

“I was afraid something awkward might have occurred, police job or
inquest or something of that sort.”

“You weren’t so very far wrong,” said Thorndyke. “When you are at
liberty I’ll tell you about it.”

“I’m at liberty now,” said Batson, dropping into a chair and glaring
at Thorndyke through his spectacles. “No scandal, I hope.”

Thorndyke reassured him on this point and gave him a brief account of
my adventure and our proposed visit to the works; to which he listened
with occasional ejaculations of astonishment and relief.

“By Gum!” he exclaimed, “what a mercy you got there in time. If you
hadn’t there’d have been an inquest and a devil of a fuss. I should
never have heard the last of it. Ruined the practice and worried me
into a lunatic asylum. Oh, and about those works. I wouldn’t go there
if I were you.”

“Why not?” Thorndyke asked.

“Well, you may have to answer some awkward questions, and we don’t
want this affair to get about, you know. No use raising a dust. Rumpus
of any kind plays the deuce with a medical practice.”

Thorndyke smiled at my principal’s frank egoism. “Jervis and I went
over last night,” said he, “and had a hasty look round and we found
the place quite deserted. Probably it is so still.”

“Then you won’t be able to get in. How jer get in last night?”

“I happened to have a piece of stiff wire in my pocket,” Thorndyke
replied impassively.

“Ha!” said Batson. “Wire, eh? Picklock in fact. I wouldn’t, if I were
you. Devil of a bobbery if anyone sees you. Hallo! There goes the
bell. Patient. Let him wait. ’Tisn’t six yet, is it?”

“Two minutes past,” replied Thorndyke, rising and looking at his
watch. “Perhaps we had better be starting as it’s now dark, and the
business at the works, if there is any, is probably over for the day.”

“Hang the works!” exclaimed Batson. “I wouldn’t go nosing about there.
What’s the good? Jardine’s alright and the chappie isn’t likely to be
on view. You’ll only raise a stink for nothing and bring in a crowd of
beastly reporters humming about the place. There’s that damn bell
again. Well, if you won’t stay, perhaps you’ll look me up some other
time. Always d’lighted to see you. Jervis too. You’re not going,
Jardine. I’ve got to settle up with you and hear your report.”

“I’ll look in later,” said I; “when you’ve finished the evening’s
work.”

“Right you are,” said Batson, opening the door and adroitly edging us
out. “Sorry you can’t stay. Good-night! Good-night!”

He shepherded us persuasively and compellingly down the hall, with a
skill born of long practice with garrulous patients, and, having
exchanged us on the doorstep for a stout woman with two children,
returned into the house with his prey and was lost to sight.




 CHAPTER VII.
 AN UNSEEN ENEMY

From my late principal’s house we walked away quickly down the
lamplit street, all, I think, dimly amused at the circumstances of our
departure.

“Is Batson always like that?” Thorndyke asked.

“Always,” I replied. “Hurry and bustle are his normal states.”

“Dear, dear,” commented Thorndyke, “what a terrible amount of time he
must waste. Of course, one can understand now how that cremation
muddle came about. Your incurable hustler is always thinking of the
things he has got to do next instead of the thing that he is doing at
the moment. By the way, Jardine, I am taking it for granted that you
would like to inspect these premises. It is not essential. Jervis and
I had a preliminary look round last night, and I daresay we picked up
most of the facts that are likely to be of importance if we should be
going farther into the matter.”

“I think it would be as well for me to take a look at the place and
show you exactly where and how the affair happened.”

“I think so too,” said Thorndyke. “It was all pretty evident, but you
might be able to show us something that we had overlooked. Here we
are. I wonder if Mr. Gill is on the premises--supposing him still to
frequent them.”

He looked up and down the street, and, taking a key from his pocket,
inserted it into the lock.

“Why, how on earth did you get the key?” I asked. Thorndyke looked at
me slyly.

“We keep a tame mechanic,” said he, as he turned the key and opened
the wicket.

“Yes, but how did he get the pattern of the lock?” I asked.

Thorndyke laughed softly. “It is only a simple trade lock. The fact
is, Jardine, that in our branch of practice we have occasionally to
take some rather irregular proceedings. For instance, I usually carry
a small set of picklocks--fortunately for you. That is how I got in
last night. Then I never go abroad without a little box of moulding
wax; a most invaluable material, Jardine, for collecting certain kinds
of evidence. Well, with a slip of wood and a bit of wax I was able to
furnish my man with the necessary data for filing up a blank key. One
doesn’t want to be seen using a picklock. Now, can you show us the
way?”

He flashed a pocket electric lamp on the ground, and we advanced over
the rough cobbles until we reached a door at the side.

“This is where I went in,” said I. “It opens into a sort of corridor,
and at the end is a door opening on some steps that lead down to the
passage below.”

Thorndyke tried the handle of the door and pushed, but it was
evidently locked or bolted.

“I left this door unlocked last night,” said he; “so it is clear that
someone has been here since. I hardly expected that. I thought our
friend would have cleared off for good. But it is possible that Gill
had nothing to do with the attempt. The premises may have been used by
someone who happened to know that they were unoccupied. It would have
been quite easy for such a person to gain admittance; as you see.”

While speaking, he had produced from his pocket a little bunch of
skeleton keys, with one of which he now quietly unlocked the door.

“These builders’ locks,” said he, “are merely symbolic of security.
You are not expected to unfasten them without authority, but you can
if you like and happen to have a bit of stiff wire.”

We entered the corridor, and, as we proceeded, looked into the rooms
that opened out of it. One of them was meagrely furnished as an
office, but the thick layer of dust on the desk and stools showed
clearly that it had been long disused; the other rooms were empty and
desolate, and showed no trace of use or occupation.

“The worthy Gill,” said Jervis, “seems to have been able, like
Diogenes, to get on with a very modest outfit.”

“Yes,” agreed Thorndyke, “it is a little difficult to guess what his
occupation is. The place looks as if it had never been used at all.
Shall I go first?”

He halted for a moment, passing the light of his lamp over the massive
door at the head of the steps, and then began to descend. It was
certainly a horrible and repulsive place, especially to my eyes, with
the recollection of my late experience fresh in my mind. The rough
brick walls, covered with the crumbling remains of old white-wash, the
black masses of cobwebs that drooped like funereal stalactites from
the ceiling, the fungi that sprouted in corners, and the snail-tracks
that glistened in the lamplight on the stone floor, all contributed to
a vault-like sepulchral effect that was most unpleasantly suggestive
of what might have been and very nearly had been.

My late prison was easily distinguished by the two holes in the door.
We looked in; but that cellar was completely empty save for a few
chips of wood and a pinch or two of sawdust; memorials of my sojourn
in the lethal chamber at which I could hardly look without a shudder.
Then we passed on to the next cellar--the one adjoining my prison--and
this was an object of no little curiosity to me. Here, while I was
securely bolted into my cell, that unknown villain had, deliberately
and in cold blood, made all the arrangements for my murder;
arrangements which he little suspected that I should survive to look
upon.

Thorndyke, too, was interested. He stood at the open door, looking in
as if considering the positions of various objects. As in fact he was.

“Someone has been here since last night, Jervis,” said he.

“Yes,” agreed Jervis. “That gas bottle has been taken down from the
opening. You see, Jardine,” he continued, “he had stood that big
packing-case up on end and laid the gas bottle along the top, with its
nozzle just opposite the hole. Two other bottles were standing upright
with their nozzles upwards.”

“I understand,” said Thorndyke, “that you heard three bottles only
turned on?”

“Yes,” I answered; “there was the one opposite the hole and two
others.”

“I ask,” Thorndyke said, “because there are, as you see, seven other
bottles, lying by the wall. Those are all empty. We tried them when we
came here last night.”

“I know nothing about those others,” said I. “The three bottles that I
have mentioned I heard distinctly, and after he had turned on the
third, the man went out of the cellar and closed up the door.”

“Then,” said Thorndyke, “the other seven were presumably used for some
other--and let us hope, more legitimate--purpose. I wonder why our
friend has been at the trouble of moving the cylinders.”

“Perhaps,” suggested Jervis, “he thought that the arrangement might be
a little too illuminating for the police, if they should happen to pay
a visit to the place. He may not be aware that the apparatus had
already been inspected _in situ_ by us. Or, again, the cylinders may
have been moved by someone else. We are assuming that he is a lawful
occupant of the premises; but he may be a mere secret intruder like
ourselves, who has discovered that the place is more or less
unoccupied and has made use of the premises and plant for his own
benevolent purposes.”

“Yes,” agreed Thorndyke, “that is perfectly true. But we can put the
matter to the test, at least negatively. If the cylinders have been
moved by an innocent stranger they will bear the prints of hands.”

“But why shouldn’t the man himself leave the prints of his hands on
the cylinders?” I asked.

“Because, my dear Jardine, he is too knowing a bird. Jervis and I went
carefully over the cylinders last night in the hope of getting a few
finger-prints to submit to Scotland Yard; but not a vestige could we
find. Our friend had seen to that. We assumed that he had operated in
gloves and your description of him confirmed our assumption. Which, in
its way, is an interesting fact, for a man who is knowing enough to
take these precautions has probably had some previous experience of
crime, or, at least, has some acquaintance with the ways of criminals.
The suggestion, in fact, is that, although this is not an ordinary
professional crime, the perpetrator may be a professional criminal.
And the further suggestion is, of course, that of very deliberate
premeditation.”

While he had been speaking he had produced from his pocket a small,
flattened bottle fitted with a metal cap and filled with a yellowish
powder. Removing the cap and uncovering a perforated inner cap, like
that of an iodoform dredger, he proceeded to shake a cloud of the
light powder over the three upper cylinders, jarring them with his
foot to make the powder spread. Then he blew sharply on them, one
after the other, when the powder disappeared from their surfaces,
leaving visible one or two shapeless whitened smears but never a trace
of a finger-print or even the shape of a hand.

Thorndyke rose and slipped the bottle back in his pocket.

“Apparently,” said he, “the cylinders were moved by our unknown
friend, with the same careful precautions as on the first occasion. A
wary gentleman, this, Jervis. He’ll give us a run for our money, at
any rate.”

“Yes,” agreed Jervis, “he doesn’t mean to give himself away. He
preserves his incognito most punctiliously. I’ll say that for him.”

“And meanwhile,” said Thorndyke, “we had better proceed with our
measures for drawing him out of this modest retirement. I want you,
Jardine, to look round this cellar and tell us if any of the things
that you see in it reminds you of anything that has happened to you,
or suggests any thought or reflection.”

I looked round, I am afraid rather vacantly. A more unsuggestive
collection of objects I have never looked upon.

“There are the gas cylinders,” I said, feebly; “but I have told you
about them. I don’t see anything else excepting a few oddments of
rubbish.”

“Then take a good look at the rubbish,” said he. “Remember that it may
be necessary at some future time for you to recall exactly what this
cellar was like, and what it contained. You may even have to make a
sworn statement. So cast your eye round and tell us what you see.”

I did so, wondering inwardly what the deuce I was expected to see and
what might be the importance of my seeing it.

“I see,” said I, “a mouldy-looking cellar about fifteen feet by
twelve, with very bad brick walls, a plaster ceiling in an advanced
stage of decay, and a concrete floor. In the left hand wall is a hole
about six inches square opening into the adjoining cellar. The
contents are ten gas cylinders, all apparently empty, a key or spanner
which seems to have been used to turn the cocks, a large packing-case,
which, to judge by its shape, seems to have contained gas cylinders--”

“The word ‘large,’” interrupted Thorndyke, “is not a particularly
exact one.”

“Well, then, a packing-case about seven feet long by two and a half
feet wide and deep.”

“That’s better,” said Thorndyke. “Always give your dimensions in
quantitative terms if possible. Go on.”

“There are a couple of waterproof sheets,” said I. “I don’t see quite
what they can have been used for.”

“Never mind their use,” said Thorndyke. “Note the fact that they are
here.”

“I have,” said I; “and that seems to complete the list with the
exception of the straw in which I suppose the gas cylinders were
packed. There is a large quantity of that, but not more than would
seem necessary for the purpose. And that seems to complete the
inventory, and, I may say, that none of these things conveys any
suggestion whatever to my mind.”

“Probably not,” said Thorndyke, “and it is quite possible that none of
these things has any particular significance at all. But as they are
the only facts offered us, we must make the best of them. There is one
other cellar that we have not yet looked into, I think.”

We came out, and, walking along the passage, came to another door
which stood slightly ajar. Thorndyke opened it, and, throwing in the
light of his lamp, revealed a considerable stack of long iron gas
bottles, and one or two packing-cases similar to the one I had already
seen.

“I presume,” said he, “that these are full cylinders; the store from
which our friend got his supply, but we may as well make sure.”

He ran back into the adjoining cellar, and returned with the spanner,
with which he proceeded to turn the cock of one of the topmost
cylinders; upon which a loud hiss and a thin, snowy cloud showed that
his surmise was correct.

He had just closed the cock and stepped out into the passage to take
back the spanner, when I saw him stop suddenly as if listening. And
then he sniffed once or twice.

“What is it?” asked Jervis; but Thorndyke, without replying, ran
quickly along the passage and up the steps, and I heard him trying the
door at the top.

“Bring up one of the empty cylinders,” he said quietly. “They have
bolted us in and apparently set fire to the place.”

We did not require much urging to act quickly. Picking up one of the
long, ponderous iron cylinders, we ran with it along the passage
towards the light of Thorndyke’s lamp. As we ascended the steps I
became plainly aware of the smell of burning wood and of a crackling
sound, faintly audible through the massive door.

“There is only one bolt,” said Thorndyke; “I noticed it as we came in.
I will throw my light on the part of the door where it is fixed, and
you two must batter on that spot with the cylinder.”

The door was, as I have said, a massive one, but it would have been a
massive door indeed that could have withstood the blows of that
ponderous iron cylinder, wielded by two strong men whose lives
depended on their efforts. At the very first crash of the
battering-ram, a tiny chink opened and at each thundering blow, the
building shook. Furiously we pounded at the thick, plank-built door,
and slowly the chink widened as the screws of the bolt tore out of the
woodwork. And as the chink opened, a thin reek of pungent smoke
filtered in, and the cold light of Thorndyke’s lantern became
contrasted with a red glare from without. And then suddenly, the door,
under the heavy battering, burst from its fastenings and swung open. A
blinding, choking cloud of smoke and sparks rolled in upon us, through
which we could see in the corridor outside a pile of straw and crates
and broken packing-cases, blazing and cracking furiously. It looked as
if we were cut off beyond all hope.

Jervis and I had dropped the now useless cylinder and were gazing in
horror at the blazing mass that filled the corridor and cut off our
only means of escape, when we were recalled by the voice of Thorndyke,
speaking in his usual quiet and precise manner.

“We must get the full cylinders up as quickly as possible,” said he;
and, running down the steps he made straight for the end cellar,
whither we followed him. Picking up one of the cylinders, we carried
it quickly to the top of the steps.

“Lay it down,” said Thorndyke, “and fetch another.”

Jervis and I ran back to the cellar, and taking up another cylinder,
brought it along the passage. As we were ascending the steps, there
suddenly arose a loud, penetrating hiss, and as we reached the top, we
saw Thorndyke disengaging the spanner from the cock of the cylinder
out of which a jet of liquid was issuing, mingled with a dense, snowy
cloud.

An instantaneous glance, as we laid down the fresh cylinder, reassured
me very considerably. The icy, volatile liquid and the falling cloud
of intensely cold carbonic acid snow had produced an immediate effect;
as was evident in a blackened, smouldering patch in the midst of the
blazing mass. With reviving hope I followed Jervis once more down the
steps and along the passage to the end cellar, from which we brought
forth a third cylinder.

By this time the passage was so filled with smoke that it was
difficult either to see or to breathe, and the bright light that had
at first poured in through the open doorway had already pulled down so
far that Thorndyke’s figure, framed in the opening, loomed dim and
shadowy amidst the smoke and against the dusky red background. We
found him, when we reached the top of the steps, holding the great gas
bottle and directing the stream of snow and liquid on to those parts
of the wood and straw from which flames still issued.

“It will be all right,” he said in his calm, unemotional way; “the
fire had not really got an effective start. The straw made a great
show, but that is nearly all burnt now, and all this carbonic acid gas
will soon smother the burning wood. But we must be careful that it
doesn’t smother us too. The steps will be the safest place for the
present.”

He opened the cock of the new cylinder and, having placed it so that
it played on the most refractory part of the burning mass, backed to
the steps where Jervis and I stood looking through the doorway. The
fire was, as he has said, rapidly dying down. The volumes of gas
produced by the evaporation of the liquid and the melting snow, cut
off the supply of air so that, in place of the flames that had, at
first, looked so alarming, only a dense reek of smoke arose.

“Now,” said Thorndyke, after we had waited on the steps a couple of
minutes more, “I think we might make a sortie and put an end to it. If
we can get the smouldering stuff off that wooden floor down on to the
stone, the danger will be over.”

He led the way cautiously into the corridor, and, once more bringing
his electric lamp into requisition, began to kick the smouldering
cases and crates and the blackened masses of straw down the steps on
to the stone floor of the passage, whither we followed them and
scattered them with our feet until they were completely safe from any
chance of re-ignition.

“There,” said Jervis, giving a final kick at a small heap of smoking
straw, “I should think that ought to do. There’s no fear of that stuff
lighting up again. And, if I may venture to make the remark, the
sooner we are off these premises the happier I shall be. Our friend’s
methods of entertaining his visitors are a trifle too strenuous for my
taste. He might try dynamite next.”

“Yes,” I agreed; “or he might take pot shots at us with a revolver
from some dark corner.”

“It is much more likely,” said Thorndyke, “that he has cleared off in
anticipation of the alarm of fire. Still, it is undeniable that we
shall be safer outside. Shall I go first and show you a light?”

He piloted us along the corridor and up the cobbled yard, putting away
his lamp as he unlocked the wicket. There was no sign of anyone about
the premises nor, when we had passed out of the gate, was there anyone
in sight in the street. I looked about, expecting to see some sign of
the fire; but there was no smoke visible, and only a slight smell of
burning wood. The smoke must have drifted out at the back.

“Well,” Thorndyke remarked, “it has been quite an exciting little
episode. And a highly satisfactory finish, as things turned out;
though it might easily have been very much the reverse. But for the
fortunate chance of those gas-bottles being available, I don’t think
we should be alive at this moment.”

“No,” agreed Jervis. “We should be in much the same condition by this
time as Batson’s late patient, Mr. Maddock, or at least, well on our
way to that disembodied state. However, all’s well that ends well. Are
you coming our way, Jardine?”

“I will walk a little way with you,” said I. “Then I must go back to
Batson to settle up and fetch my traps.”

I walked with them to Oxford Street, and we discussed our late
adventure as we went.

“It was a pretty strong hint to clear out, wasn’t it?” Jervis
remarked.

“Yes,” replied Thorndyke; “it didn’t leave us much option. But the
affair can’t be left at this. I shall have a watch set on those
premises, and I shall make some more particular enquiries about Mr.
Gill. By the way, Jardine, I haven’t your address. I’d better have it
in case I want to communicate with you; and you’d better have my card
in case anything turns up which you think I ought to know.”

We accordingly exchanged cards, and, as we had now reached the corner
of Oxford Street, I wished my friends adieu and thoughtfully retraced
my steps to Jacob Street.




 CHAPTER VIII.
 “IT’S AN ILL WIND--”

London is a wonderful place. From the urban greyness of Jacob Street
to the borders of Hampstead Heath was, even in those days of the slow
horse tram, but a matter of minutes--a good many minutes, perhaps, but
still, considerably under an hour. Yet, in that brief and leisurely
journey, one exchanged the grim sordidness of a most unlovely street
for the solitude and sweet rusticity of open and charming country.

A day or two after my second adventure in the mineral water works, I
was leaning on the parapet of the viaduct--the handsome, red brick
viaduct with which some builder, unknown to me, had spanned the pond
beyond the Upper Heath, apparently with purely decorative motive, and
in a spirit of sheer philanthropy. For no road seemed to lead anywhere
in particular over it, and there was no reason why any wayfarer should
wish to cross the pond rather than walk round it; indeed, in those
days it was covered by a turfy expanse seldom trodden by any feet but
those of the sheep that grazed in the meadows bordering the pond. I
leaned on the parapet, smoking my pipe with deep contentment, and
looking down into the placid water. Flags and rushes grew at its
borders, water-lilies spread their flat leaves on its surface and a
small party of urchins angled from the margin, with the keen joy of
the juvenile sportsman who suspects that his proceedings are unlawful.

I had lounged on the parapet for several minutes, when I became aware
of a man, approaching along the indistinct track that crossed the
viaduct, and, as he drew near, I recognized him as the keeper whom I
had met in Ken Wood on the morning after my discovery of the body in
Millfield Lane. I would have let him pass with a smile of recognition,
but he had no intention of passing. Touching his hat politely, he
halted, and, having wished me good-morning, remarked:

“You didn’t tell me, sir, what it was you were looking for that
morning when I met you in the wood.”

“No,” I replied, “but apparently, someone else has.”

“Well, sir, you see,” he said, “the sergeant came up the next day with
a plain-clothes man to have a look round, and, as the sergeant is an
old acquaintance of mine, he gave me the tip as to what they were
after. I am sorry, sir, you didn’t tell me what you were looking for.”

“Why?” I asked.

“Well,” he replied, “we might have found something if we had looked
while the tracks were fresh. Unfortunately there was a gale in the
night that fetched down a lot of leaves, and blew up those that had
already fallen, so that any foot-marks would have got hidden before
the sergeant came.”

“What did the police officers seem to think about it?” I asked.

“Why, to speak the truth,” the keeper replied, “they seemed to think
it was all bogey.”

“Do you mean to say,” I asked, “that they thought I had invented the
whole story?”

“Oh, no, sir,” he replied, “not that. They believed you had seen a man
lying in the lane, but they didn’t believe that he was a dead man, and
they thought your imagination had misled you about the tracks.”

“Then, I suppose they didn’t find anything?” said I.

“No, they didn’t, and I haven’t been able to find anything myself,
though I’ve had a good look round.” And then, after a brief pause: “I
wonder,” he said, “if you would care to come up to the Wood and have a
look at the place yourself.”

I considered for a moment. I had nothing to do for I was taking a day
off, and the man’s proposal sounded rather attractive. Finally, I
accepted his offer, and we turned back together towards the Wood.

Hampstead--the Hampstead of those days--was singularly rustic and
remote. But, within the wood, it was incredible that the town of
London actually lay within the sound of a church bell or the flight of
a bullet. Along the shady paths, carpeted with moss and silvery
lichen, overshadowed by the boughs of noble beeches; or in leafy
hollows, with the humus of centuries under our feet, and the
whispering silence of the woodland all around, we might have been
treading the glades of some primeval forest. Nor was the effect of
this strange remoteness less, when presently, emerging from the
thicker portion of the wood, we came upon a moss-grown, half-ruinous
boathouse on the sedgy margin of a lake, in which was drawn up a
rustic-looking, and evidently, little-used punt.

“It’s wonderful quiet about here, sir,” the keeper remarked, as a
water-hen stole out from behind a clump of high rushes and scrambled
over the leaves of the water-lilies.

“And presumably,” I remarked, “it’s quieter still at night.”

“You’re right, sir,” the keeper replied. “If that man had got as far
as this, he’d have had mighty little trouble in putting the body where
no one was ever likely to look for it.”

“I suppose,” said I, “that you had a good look at the edges of the
lake?”

“Yes,” he answered. “I went right round it, and so did the police, for
that matter, and we had a good look at the punt, too. But, all the
same, it wouldn’t surprise me if, one fine day, that body came
floating up among the lilies; always supposing, that is,” he added,
“that there really was a body.”

“How far is it,” I asked, “from the lake to the place where you met me
that morning?”

“It’s only a matter of two or three minutes,” he answered, “we may as
well walk that way and you can see for yourself.” Accordingly, we set
forth together, and, coming presently upon one of the moss-grown
paths, followed it past a large summerhouse until we came in sight of
the beech beyond which I had encountered him while I was searching for
the tracks. As we went, he plied me with questions as to what I had
seen on the night in the lane, and I made no scruple of telling him
all that I had told the police, seeing that they, on their side, had
made no secret of the matter.

Of course, it was idle, after this long period--for it was now more
than seven weeks since I had seen the body--to attempt anything in the
nature of a search. It certainly did look as if the man who had stolen
into that wood that night had been bound for the solitary lake. The
punt, I had noticed, was only secured with a rope, so that the
murderer--for such I assumed he must have been--could easily have
carried his dreadful burden out into the middle, and there sunk it
with weights, and so hidden it for ever. It was a quick, simple and
easy method of hiding the traces of his crime, and, if the police had
not thought it worth while to search the water with drags, there was
no reason why the buried secret should not remain buried for all time.

After we had walked for some time about the pleasant, shady wood, less
shady now that the yellowing leaves were beginning to fall with the
passing of autumn, the keeper conducted me to the exit by which I had
left on the previous occasion.

As I was passing out of the wicket, my eye fell once more on the
cottage which I had then noticed, and, recalling the remark that my
fair acquaintance had let fall concerning the artist to whom the
derelict knife was supposed to belong, I said: “You mentioned, I
think, that that house was let to an artist.”

“It was,” he replied; “but it’s empty now, the artist has gone away.”

“It must be a pleasant little house to live in,” I said, “at any rate,
in summer.”

“Yes,” he replied, “a country house within an hour’s walk of the Bank
of England. Would you like to have a look at it, sir? I’ve got the
keys.”

Now I certainly had no intention of offering myself as a tenant, but,
yet, to an idle man, there is a certain attractiveness in an empty
house of an eligible kind, a certain interest in roaming through the
rooms and letting one’s fancy furnish them with one’s own household
goods. I accepted the man’s invitation, and, opening the wide gate
that admitted to the garden from a byroad, we walked up to the door of
the house.

“It’s quite a nice little place,” the keeper remarked. “There isn’t
much garden, you see, but then, you’ve got the Heath all around; and
there’s a small stable and coachhouse if you should be wanting to go
into town.”

“Did the last tenant keep any kind of carriage?” I asked.

“I don’t think so,” said the keeper, “but I fancy he used to hire a
little cart sometimes when he had things to bring in from town; but I
don’t know very much about him or his habits.”

We walked through the empty rooms together looking out of the windows
and commenting on the pleasant prospects that all of them commanded,
and talking about the man who had last lived in the house.

“He was a queer sort of fellow,” said the keeper. “He and his wife
seem to have lived here all alone without any servant, and they seem
often to have left the house to itself for a day or two at a time; but
he could paint. I have stopped and had a look when he has been at
work, and it was wonderful to see how he knocked off those pictures.
He didn’t seem to use brushes, but he had a lot of knives, like little
trowels, and he used to shovel the paint on with them, and he always
wore gloves when he was painting; didn’t like to get the paint on his
hands, I suppose.”

“It sounds as if it would be very awkward,” I said.

“Just what I should have thought,” the keeper agreed. “But he didn’t
seem to find it so. This seems to be the place that he worked in.”

Apparently the keeper was right. The room, which we had now entered,
was evidently the late studio, and did not appear to have been cleaned
up since the tenant left. The floor was littered with scraps of paper
on which a palette-knife had been cleaned, with empty paint-tubes and
one or two broken and worn-out brushes, and, in a packing-case, which
seemed to have served as a receptacle for rubbish, were one or two
canvases that had been torn from their stretchers and thrown away. I
picked them out and glanced at them with some interest, remembering
what my fair friend had said. For the most part, they were mere
experiments or failures, deliberately defaced with strokes or daubs of
paint, but one of them was a quite spirited and attractive sketch,
rough and unfinished, but skilfully executed and undefaced. I
stretched out the crumpled canvas and looked at it with considerable
interest. It represented Millfield Lane, and showed the large elms and
the posts and the high fence under which I had sheltered in the rain.
In fact, it appeared to have been taken from the exact spot on which
the body had been lying, and from which I had made my own drawing; not
that there was anything in the latter coincidence, for it was the only
sketchable spot in the lane.

“It’s really quite a nice sketch,” I said; “it seems a pity to leave
it here among the rubbish.”

“It does, sir,” the keeper agreed. “If you like it, you had better
roll it up and put it in your pocket. You won’t be robbing anyone.”

As it seemed that I was but rescuing it from a rubbish-heap, I
ventured to follow the keeper’s advice, and, rolling the canvas up,
carefully stowed it in my pocket. And shortly after as I had now seen
all that there was to see, which was mighty little, we left the house,
and, at the gate, the keeper took leave of me with a touch of his hat.

I made my way slowly back towards my lodgings by way of the Spaniard’s
Road and Hampstead Lane, turning over in my mind as I went, the
speculation suggested by my visit to the wood. Of the existence of the
lake I had not been previously aware. Now that I had seen it, I felt
very little doubt that it was known to the mysterious murderer--for
such I felt convinced he was--who must have been lurking in the lane
that night when I was sheltering under the lee of the fence. The route
that he had then taken appeared to be the direct route to the lake.
That he was carrying the body, I had no doubt whatever; and, seeing
that he had carried it so far, it appeared probable that he had some
definite hiding-place in view. And what hiding-place could be so
suitable as this remote piece of still water? No digging, no
troublesome and dangerous preparation would be necessary. There was
the punt in readiness to bear him to the deep water in the middle; a
silent, easily-handled conveyance. A few stones, or some heavy object
from the boat-house, would be all that was needful; and in a moment he
would be rid for ever of the dreadful witness of his crime.

Thus reflecting--not without dissatisfaction at the passive part that
I had played in this sinister affair--I passed through the turnstile,
or “kissing-gate,” at the entrance to Millfield Lane. Almost
certainly, the murderer or the victim or both, had passed through that
very gate on the night of the tragedy. The thought came to me with
added solemnity with the recollection of the silent wood and the dark,
still water fresh in my mind, and caused me unconsciously to tread
more softly and walk more sedately than usual.

The lane was little frequented at any time and now, at mid-day, was
almost as deserted as at midnight. Very remote it seemed, too, and
very quiet, with a silence that recalled the hush of the wood. And yet
the silence was not quite unbroken. From somewhere ahead, from one of
the many windings of the tortuous lane, came the sound of hurried
footsteps. I stopped to listen. There were two persons, one treading
lightly, the other more heavily, apparently a man and a woman. And
both were running--running fast.

There was nothing remarkable in this, perhaps; but yet the sound smote
on my ear with a certain note of alarm that made me quicken my pace
and listen yet more intently. And suddenly there came another sound;
a muffled, whimpering cry like that of a frightened woman. Instantly I
gave an answering shout and sprang forward at a swift run.

I had turned one of the numerous corners and was racing down a
straight stretch of the lane when a woman darted round the corner
ahead, and ran towards me, holding out her hands. I recognized her at
a glance, though now she was dishevelled, pale, wild-eyed, breathless
and nearly frantic with terror, and rage against her assailant spurred
me on to greater speed. But when I would have passed her to give chase
to the wretch, she clutched my arm frantically with both hands and
detained me.

“Let me go and catch the scoundrel!” I exclaimed; but she only clung
the tighter.

“No,” she panted, “don’t leave me! I am terrified! Don’t go away!”

I ground my teeth. Even as we stood, I could hear the ruffian’s
footsteps receding as rapidly as they had advanced. In a few moments
he would be beyond pursuit.

“Do let me go and stop that villain!” I implored. “You’re quite safe
now, and you can follow me and keep me in sight.”

But she shook her head passionately, and, still clutching my sleeve
with one hand, pressed the other to her heart.

“No, no, no!” she gasped, with a catch in her voice that was almost a
sob, “I can’t be alone! I am frightened. Oh! Please don’t go away from
me!”

What could I do? The poor girl was evidently beside herself with
terror, and exhausted by her frantic flight. It would have been cruel
to leave her in that state. But all the same, it was infuriating. I
had no idea what the man had done to terrify her in this way. But that
was of no consequence. The natural impulse of a healthy young man when
he learns that a woman has been ill-used is to hammer the offender
effectively in the first place, and then to inquire into the affair.
That was what I wanted to do; but it was not to be.

“Well,” I said, by way of compromise, “let us walk back together.
Perhaps we may be able to find out which way the man went.”

To this she agreed. I drew her arm through mine--for she was still
trembling and looked faint and weak--and we began to retrace her steps
towards Highgate. Of course the man was nowhere to be seen, and by the
time that we had turned the sharp corner where I had found the body of
the priest, the man was not only out of sight, but his footsteps were
no longer audible.

Still we went on for some distance in the hopes of meeting someone who
could tell us which way the miscreant had gone. But we met nobody.
Only, some distance past the posts, we came in sight of a sketching
box and a camp-stool, lying by the side of the path.

“Surely those are your things?” I said.

“Yes,” she answered. “I had forgotten all about them. I dropped them
when I began to run.”

I picked up the box and the stool, and debated with myself whether it
was worth while to go on any farther. From where we stood, nothing was
to be seen, for the lane was still enclosed on both sides by a seven
foot fence of oak boards. But the chance of overtaking the fugitive
was not to be considered; by this time he was probably out of the lane
on the Heath or in the surrounding meadows; and meanwhile, my
companion, though calmer and less breathless, looked very pale and
shaken.

“I don’t know that it’s any use,” I said, “to tire you by going any
farther. The man is evidently gone.”

She seemed relieved at my decision, and it then occurred to me to
suggest that she should sit down awhile on the bank under the high
fence to recover herself, and to this, too, she assented gladly.

“If it wouldn’t distress you,” I said, “would you mind telling me what
had happened?”

She pondered for a few seconds and then answered: “It doesn’t sound
much in the telling and I expect you will think me very silly to be so
much upset.”

“I’m sure I shan’t,” I said, with perfect confidence in the
correctness of my statement.

“Well,” she said, “what happened was this as nearly as I can remember:
I was coming up the path from the ponds and I had to pass a man who
was leaning against the fence by the stile. As I came near to him, he
looked at me, at first, in quite an ordinary way, and then, he
suddenly began to stare in a most singular and disturbing fashion, not
at me, so much, as at this little crucifix which I wear hung from my
neck. As I passed through the turnstile, he spoke to me: ‘Would you
mind letting me look at that crucifix?’ he asked. It was a most
astonishing piece of impertinence, and I was so taken aback that I
hardly had the presence of mind to refuse. However, I did, and very
decidedly, too. Then he came up to me, and, in a most threatening and
alarming manner, said: ‘You found that crucifix. You picked it up
somewhere near here. It’s mine, and I’ll ask you to let me have it, if
you please.’

“Now this was perfectly untrue. The crucifix was given to me by my
father when I was quite a little child, and I have worn it ever since
I have been grown up--ever since he died, in fact, six years ago. I
told the man this, but he made no pretence of believing me, and was
evidently about to renew his demand, when two labourers appeared,
coming down the lane. I thought this a good opportunity to escape, and
walked away quickly up the lane; it was very silly of me; I ought to
have gone the other way.”

“Of course you ought,” I agreed, “you ought to have got out into a
public road at once.”

“Yes, I see that now,” she said. “It was very foolish of me. However,
I walked on pretty quickly, for there was something in the man’s face
that had frightened me, and I was anxious to get home. I looked back,
from time to time, and, when I saw no sign of the man, I began to
recover myself; but just as I had got to the most solitary part of the
lane, just about where we are now, shut in by these high fences, I
heard quick footsteps behind me. I looked back and saw the man coming
after me. Then, I suppose, I got in a sudden panic, for I dropped my
sketching things and began to run. But as soon as I began to run, the
man broke into a run too. I raced for my life, and when I heard the
man gaining on me, I suppose I must have called out. Then I heard your
shout from the upper part of the lane and ran on faster than ever to
gain your protection. That’s all, and I suppose you think that I have
been making a great fuss about nothing.”

“I don’t think anything of the kind,” I said, “and neither would our
absent friend if I could get hold of him. By the way, what sort of
person was he?--a tramp?”

“Oh, no, quite a respectable looking person; in fact, he would have
passed for a gentleman.”

“Can you give any sort of description of him, not that verbal
descriptions are of much use except in the case of a hunchback or a
Chinaman or some other easily identifiable creature.”

“No, they are not,” she agreed, “and I don’t think that I can tell you
much about this man excepting that he was clean-shaved, of medium
height, quite well dressed, and wore a round hat and slate-coloured
suede gloves.”

“I’m afraid we shan’t get hold of him from that description,” I said.
“The only thing that you can do is to avoid solitary places for the
present and not to come through this lane again alone.”

“Yes,” she said. “I suppose I must, but it’s very unfortunate. One
cannot always take a companion when one goes sketching even if it were
desirable, which it is not.”

As to the desirability, in the case of a good-looking girl, of
wandering about alone in solitary places, I had my own opinions; and
very definite opinions they were. But I kept them to myself. And so we
sat silent for awhile. She was still pale and agitated, and perhaps
her recital of her misadventure had not been wholly beneficial. At the
moment that this idea occurred to me, a crackling in my breast-pocket
reminded me of the forgotten canvas, and I bethought me that perhaps a
change of subject might divert her mind from her very disagreeable
experience. Accordingly, I drew the canvas out of my pocket, and,
unrolling it, asked her what she thought of the sketch. In a moment
she became quite animated.

“Why,” she exclaimed, “this looks exactly like the work of that artist
who was working on the Heath a little while ago.”

“It is his,” I replied, considerably impressed and rather astonished
at her instantaneous recognition; “but I didn’t know you were so
familiar with his work.”

“I’m not very familiar with it,” she replied; “but, as I told you, I
sometimes managed to steal a glance or two when I passed him. You see,
his technique is so peculiar that it’s easily recognized, and it
interested me very much. I should have liked to stop and watch him and
get a lesson.”

“It is rather peculiar work,” I said, looking at the canvas with new
interest. “Very solid and yet very smooth.”

“Yes. It is typical knife-work, almost untouched with the brush. That
was what interested me. The knife is a dangerous tool for a
comparative tyro like myself, but yet one would like to learn how to
use it. Did he give you this sketch?”

I smiled guiltily. “The truth is,” I admitted, “I stole it.”

“How dreadful of you!” she said, “I suppose that you could not be
bribed to steal another?”

“I would steal it for nothing if you asked me,” I answered, “and
meanwhile, you had better take possession of this one. It will be of
more use to you than to me.”

She shook her head: “No, I won’t do that,” she said, “though it is
most kind of you. You paint, I think, don’t you?”

“I’m only the merest amateur,” I replied. “I annexed the sketch for
the sake of the subject. I have rather an affection for this lane.”

“So had I,” said she, “until to-day. Now, I hate it, but, might I ask
how you managed your theft?”

I told her about the empty cottage and the rejected canvases in the
rubbish box.

“I’m afraid none of the others would be of any use to you because he
had drawn a brushful of paint across each of them.”

“Oh, that wouldn’t matter,” she said. “The brush-strokes would be on
dry paint and could easily be scraped off. Besides, it is not the
subject but the technique that interests me.”

“Then I will get into the cottage somehow and purloin the remaining
canvases for you.”

“Oh, but I mustn’t give you all this trouble,” she protested.

“It won’t be any trouble,” I said. “I shall quite enjoy a deliberate
and determined robbery. But where shall I send the spoil?”

She produced her card-case, and, selecting a card, handed it to me,
with a smile: “It seems, to me,” she said, “that I am inciting you to
robbery and acting as a receiver of stolen goods, but I suppose
there’s no harm in it, though I feel that I ought not to give you all
this trouble.”

I made the usual polite rejoinder as I took from her the little
magical slip of pasteboard that, in a moment, transformed her from a
stranger to an acquaintance, and gave her a local habitation and a
name. Before bestowing it in my pocket-book, I glanced at the neat
copper-plate and read the inscription: “Miss Sylvia Vyne. The
Hawthorns. North End.”

The effect of our conversation had answered my expectations. Her
agitation had passed off, the colour had come back to her cheeks, and,
in fact, she seemed quite recovered. Apparently she thought so
herself, for she rose, saying that she now felt well enough to walk
home, and held out her hand for the colour-box and stool.

“I think,” said I, “that if you won’t consider me intrusive, I should
like to see you safely out on to an inhabited road at least.”

“I shall accept your escort gratefully,” she replied, “as far as the
end of the lane, or farther if it is not taking you too much out of
your way.”

Needless to say, I would gladly have escorted so agreeable and winsome
a protegée from John o’ Groats to Land’s End and found it not out of
my way at all; and when she passed out of the gate into Hampstead
Lane, I clung tenaciously to the box and stool and turned towards “The
Spaniards” as though no such thing as a dismissal had ever been
contemplated. In fact, with the reasonable excuse of carrying the
impedimenta, I maintained my place by her side in the absence of a
definite congé; and so we walked together, talking quite easily,
principally about pictures and painting, until, in the pleasant little
hamlet, she halted by a garden gate, and, taking her possessions from
me, held out a friendly hand.

“Good-bye,” she said. “I can’t thank you enough for all your help and
kindness. I hope I have not been very troublesome to you.”

I assured her that she had been most amenable, and, when I had once
more cautioned her to avoid solitary places, we exchanged a cordial
hand-shake and parted, she to enter the pleasant, rustic-looking
house, and I to betake myself back to my lodgings, lightening the way
with much agreeable and self-congratulatory reflection.




 CHAPTER IX.
 THORNDYKE TAKES UP THE SCENT

At my lodgings, which I reached at an unconscionably late hour for
lunch, I found a little surprise awaiting me; a short note from Dr.
Thorndyke asking me if I should be at liberty early on the following
afternoon to show him the spot on which I had found the mysterious
body. Of course, I answered by return, begging him to come straight on
from the hospital to an early lunch, over which we could discuss the
facts of the case before setting out. Having dispatched my letter, I
called at the offices of the house agent who had the letting of the
cottage on the Heath, to see if he had duplicate keys. Fortunately he
had, and was willing to entrust them to me on the understanding that
they should be returned some time during the next day. I did not,
however, go on to the cottage, for it occurred to me that Thorndyke
would probably wish to visit the wood, and I could make my visit and
purloin the canvases then.

A telegram on the following morning informed me that Thorndyke would
be with me at twelve o’clock, and, punctually to the minute, he
arrived.

“I hope you don’t mind me swooping down on you in this fashion,” he
said, as the servant showed him into the room.

I assured him, very truthfully, that I was delighted to be honoured by
a visit from him, and he then proceeded to explain.

“You may wonder, Jardine, why I am busying myself about this case,
which is really no business of mine, or, at least, appears to be none;
but the fact is, that as a teacher and a practitioner of Medical
Jurisprudence, I find it advisable to look into any unusual cases. Of
course, there is always a considerable probability that I may be
consulted concerning any out of the way case; but, apart from that, I
have the ordinary specialist’s interest in anything remarkable in my
own speciality.”

“I should think,” said I, “that it would be well for me to give you
all the facts before we start.”

“Exactly, Jardine,” he replied, “that is what I want. Tell me all you
know about the affair and then we shall be able to test our
conclusions on the spot.”

He produced a large scale ordnance map, and, folding it under my
direction, so that it showed only the region in which we were
interested, he stood it up on the table against the water bottle,
where we could both see it, and marked on it with a pencil each spot
as I described it.

It is not necessary for me to record our conversation. I told him the
whole story as I have already told it to the reader, pointing out on
the map the exact locality where each event occurred.

“It’s a most remarkable case, Jardine,” was his thoughtful comment
when I had finished, “most remarkable; curiously puzzling and
inconsistent too. For you see that on the one hand, it looks like a
casual or accidental crime, and yet, on the other, strongly suggests
premeditation. No man, one would think, could have planned to commit a
murder in what is, after all, a public thoroughfare; and yet, the long
distance which the body seems to have been carried, and the apparently
selected hiding-place, seem to suggest a previously considered plan.”

“You think that there is no doubt that the man was really dead?” I
asked.

“Had you any doubt at the time yourself?”

“None at all,” I replied, “it was only the disappearance of the body,
and, perhaps, the sergeant’s suggestion, that made me think it
possible that I might have been mistaken.”

Thorndyke shook his head. “No, Jardine,” said he, “the man was dead.
We are safe in assuming that; and on that assumption our
investigations must be based. The next question is, how was the body
taken away? Did you measure the fence?”

“No, but I should say it is about seven feet high.”

“And what kind of fence is it? Are there any footholds?”

“I can show you exactly what the fence is like,” I answered. “That
sketch, which I have pinned up on the wall, was apparently painted
from the exact spot on which the body lay. That fence on the
right-hand side is the one under which I sheltered and is exactly like
the one over which the body seems to have been lifted.”

Thorndyke rose and walked over to the sketch, which I had fixed to the
wall with drawing-pins.

“Not a bad sketch, this, Jardine,” he remarked; “very smartly put in,
apparently mostly with the knife. Where did you get it?”

I had to confess that the canvas was unlawfully come by, and told him
how I had obtained it.

“You don’t know the artist’s name?” said Thorndyke, looking closely at
the sketch.

“No. In fact, I know nothing about him, excepting that he worked
mostly with a small painting-knife, and usually wore kid gloves.”

“You don’t mean that he worked in gloves?” said Thorndyke.

“So I am told,” said I. “I never saw him.”

“It’s very odd,” said Thorndyke. “I have heard of men wearing a glove
on the palette-hand to keep off the midges, and many men paint in
gloves in exceptionally cold weather. But this sketch seems to have
been painted in the summer.”

“I suppose,” said I, “the midges don’t confine their attentions to the
palette-hand. And after all, to a man who worked entirely with the
knife, a glove wouldn’t be really in the way.”

“No,” Thorndyke agreed, “that is true.” He looked closely at the
sketch, and even took out his pocket lens to help his vision, which
seemed almost unnecessary. It appeared that he was as much interested
in the unknown artist’s peculiar technique as was my friend, Miss
Sylvia Vyne.

“By the way,” said he, when he had resumed his seat at the table, “you
were telling me about some kind of gold trinket that you had picked up
at the foot of the fence. Shall we have a look at it?”

I fetched the little gold object from the dispatch box in which I had
locked it up, and handed it to him. He turned it over in his fingers,
read the letters that were engraved on it, and examined the little
piece of silk cord that was attached to one ring.

“There is no doubt,” said he, “as to the nature of this object, nor of
its connection with the dead man. This is evidently a reliquary, and
these initials engraved upon it bear out exactly your description of
the body. S.V.D.P. evidently means St. Vincent de Paul, who, as you
probably know, was a saint who was distinguished for his works of
charity. You have mentioned that the dead man wore a Roman collar,
with a narrow, dark stripe up the front. That means that he was the
lay-brother of some religious order, probably some philanthropic
order, to whom St. Vincent de Paul would be an object of special
devotion. The other letters, A.M.D.G., are the initials of the words
_Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam_--the motto of the Society of Jesus. But as
St. Vincent de Paul was not a Jesuit saint, the motto probably refers
to the owner of the reliquary, who may have been a Jesuit or a friend
of the Society. It was apparently attached--perhaps to the neck--by
this silk cord, which seems to have been frayed nearly through, and
probably broke when the body was drawn over the top of the fence.”

“I suppose I ought to have shown it to the police,” I said.

“I suppose you ought,” he replied, “but, as you haven’t, I think we
had better say nothing about it now.”

He handed it back to me, and I dropped it into my pocket, intending to
return it presently to the dispatch box. A few minutes later, we
sallied forth on our journey of exploration.

It is not necessary to describe this journey in detail since I have
already taken the reader over the ground more than once. We went, of
course, to the place where I had found the body and walked right
through to Hampstead Lane. Then we returned, and reconstituted the
circumstances of that eventful night, after which, I conducted
Thorndyke to the place where I assumed that the body had been lifted
over the fence.

“I suppose,” I said, “we must go round and pick up the track from the
other side.”

He looked up and down the lane and smiled. “Would your quondam
professor lose your respect for ever, Jardine, if you saw him climb
over a fence in a frock coat and a topper?”

“No,” I answered, “but it might look a little quaint if anyone else
saw you.”

“I think we will risk that,” he said. “There is no one about, and I
should rather like to try a little experiment. Would you mind if I
hoisted you over the fence? You are something of an out-size, but
then, so am I, too, which balances the conditions.”

Of course I had no objection, and, when we had looked up and down the
lane and listened to make sure that we had no observers, Thorndyke
picked me up, with an ease that rather surprised me, and hoisted me
above the level of the fence.

“Is it all clear on the other side?” he asked.

“Yes,” I answered, “there’s no one in sight.”

“Then I want you to be quite passive,” he said, and with this, he
hoisted me up further until I hung with my own weight across the top
of the fence. Leaving me hanging thus, he sprang up lightly, and,
having got astride at the top, dropped down on the other side, when he
once more took hold of me and drew me over.

“It wasn’t so very difficult,” he said. “Of course, it would have been
more so to a shorter man, but, on the other hand, it is extremely
unlikely that the body was anything like your size and weight.”

We now followed the track up to the wood, which we entered by an
opening in the fence, through which I assumed that the murderer had
probably passed. I conducted Thorndyke by the nearest route to the
boat-house, and, when he had thoroughly examined the place and made
notes of the points that appeared to interest him, I showed him the
way out by the turnstile.

It was here when we came in sight of the cottage that I bethought me
of my promise to Miss Vyne, and somewhat sheepishly explained the
matter to Thorndyke.

“It won’t take me a minute to go in and sneak the things,” I said
apologetically, and was proposing that he should walk on slowly, when
he interrupted me.

“I’ll come in with you,” said he. “There may be something else to
filch. Besides, I am rather partial to empty houses. There is
something quite interesting, I think, in looking over the traces of
recent occupation, and speculating on the personality and habits of
the late occupiers. Don’t you find it so?”

I said “Yes,” truthfully enough, for it was a feeling of this kind
that had first led me to look over the cottage. But my interest was
nothing to Thorndyke’s; for no sooner had I let him in at the front
door, than he began to browse about through the empty rooms and
passages, for all the world like a cat that has just been taken to a
new house.

“This was evidently the studio,” he remarked, as we entered the room
from which I had taken the canvas. “He doesn’t seem to have had much
of an outfit, as he appears to have worked on his sketching-easel; you
can see the indentations made by the toe-points, and there are no
marks of the castors of a studio easel. You notice, too, that he sat
on a camp-stool to work.”

It did not appear to me to matter very much what he had sat on, but I
kept this opinion to myself and watched Thorndyke curiously as he
picked up the empty paint tubes and scrutinized them one after the
other. His inquisitiveness filled me with amused astonishment. He
turned out the rubbish box completely, and having looked over every
inch of the discarded canvases, he began systematically to examine,
one by one, the pieces of paper on which the late resident had wiped
his palette-knife.

Having rolled up and pocketed the waste canvases, I expressed myself
as ready to depart.

“If you’re not in a hurry,” said Thorndyke, “I should like to look
over the rest of the premises.”

He spoke as though we were inspecting some museum or exhibition, and,
indeed, his interest and attention, as he wandered from room to room,
were greater than that of the majority of visitors to a public
gallery. He even insisted on visiting the little stable and
coach-house, and when he had explored them both, ascended the rickety
steps to the loft over the latter.

“I suppose,” said I, “this was the lumber room or store. Judging by
the quantity of straw it would seem as if some cases had been unpacked
here.”

“Probably,” agreed Thorndyke. “In fact, you can see where the cases
have been dragged along, and also, by that smooth indented line, where
some heavy metallic object has been slid along the floor. Perhaps if
we look over the straw, we may be able to judge what those cases
contained.”

It didn’t seem to me to matter a brass farthing what they contained,
but again I made no remark; and together we moved the great mass of
straw, almost handful by handful, from one end of the loft to the
other, while Thorndyke, not only examined the straw but even closely
scrutinized the floor on which it lay.

As far as I could see, all this minute and apparently purposeless
searching was entirely without result, until we were in the act of
removing the last armful of straw from the corner; and even then the
object that came to light did not appear a very remarkable one under
the circumstances, though Thorndyke seemed to find what appeared to me
a most unreasonable interest in it. The object was a pair of
canvas-pliers, which Thorndyke picked up almost eagerly and examined
with profound attention.

“What do you make of that, Jardine?” he asked, at length, handing the
implement to me.

“It’s a pair of canvas-pliers,” I replied.

“Obviously,” he rejoined, “but what do you suppose they have been used
for?”

I opined that they had been used for straining canvases, that being
their manifest function.

“But,” objected Thorndyke, “he would hardly have strained his canvases
up here. Besides, you will notice that they have, in fact, been used
for something else. You observe that the handles are slightly bent, as
if something had been held with great force, and if you look at the
jaws, you will see that that something was a metallic object about
three-quarters of an inch wide with sharp corners. Now, what do you
make of that?”

I looked at the pliers, inwardly reflecting that I didn’t care
twopence what the object was, and finally said that I would give it
up.

“The problem does not interest you keenly,” Thorndyke remarked with a
smile; “and yet it ought to, you know. However, we may consider the
matter on some future occasion. Meanwhile, I shall follow your
pernicious example and purloin the pliers.”

His interest in this complete stranger appeared to me very singular,
and it seemed for the moment to have displaced that in the mysterious
case which was the object of his visit to me.

“A strange, vagabond sort of man that artist must have been,” he
remarked, as we walked home across the Heath, “but I suppose one picks
up vagabond habits in travelling about the world.”

“Do you gather that he had travelled much, then?” I asked.

“He appears to have visited New York, Brussels and Florence, which is
a selection suggesting other travels.”

I was wondering vaguely how Thorndyke had arrived at these facts, and
was indeed about to ask him, when he suddenly changed the subject by
saying:

“I suppose, Jardine, you don’t wander about this place alone at
night?”

“I do sometimes,” I replied.

“Then I shouldn’t,” he said; “you must remember that a very determined
attempt has been made on your life, and it would be unreasonable to
suppose that it was made without some purpose. But that purpose is
still unaccomplished. You don’t know who your enemy is, and,
consequently, can take no precautions against him excepting by keeping
away from solitary places. It is an uncomfortable thought, but at
present, you have to remember that any chance stranger may be an
intending murderer. So be on your guard.”

I promised to bear his warning in mind, though I must confess his
language seemed to me rather exaggerated; and so we walked on,
chatting about various matters until we arrived at my lodgings.

Thorndyke was easily persuaded to come in and have tea with me, and
while we were waiting for its arrival, he renewed his examination of
the sketch upon the wall.

“Aren’t you going to have this strained on a stretcher?” he asked.

I replied “yes,” and that I intended to take it with me the next time
I went into town.

“Let me take it for you,” said Thorndyke. “I should like to show it to
Jervis to illustrate the route that we have marked on the map. Then I
can have it left at any place that you like.”

I mentioned the name of an artist’s-colourman in the Hampstead Road,
and, unpinning the canvas, rolled it up and handed it to him.

He took it from me and, rolling it up methodically and carefully,
bestowed it in his breast pocket. Then he brought forth the map, and,
as we drank our tea and talked over our investigations, we checked our
route on it and marked the position of the cottage. Shortly after tea
he took his leave, and I then occupied an agreeable half-hour in
composing a letter to Miss Vyne to accompany the loot from the
deserted house.




 CHAPTER X.
 THE UNHEEDED WARNING

Thorndyke’s warning, so emphatically expressed, ought to have been
alike unnecessary and effective. As a matter of fact, it was neither.
I suppose that to a young man, not naturally timorous, the idea of a
constantly lurking danger amidst the prosaic conditions of modern
civilization is one that is not readily accepted. At any rate, the
fact is that I continued to walk abroad by day and by night with as
much unconcern as if nothing unusual had ever befallen me. It was not
that the recollection of those horrible hours in the poisoned cellar
had in any way faded. That incident I could never forget. But I think,
that in the back of my mind, there still lingered the idea of a
homicidal lunatic; though that idea had been so scornfully rejected by
Thorndyke.

But before I describe the amazing experience by which I once more came
within a hair’s breadth of sudden and violent death, I must refer to
another incident; not because it seemed to be connected with that
alarming occurrence, but because it came first in the order of time,
and had its own significance later.

It was a couple of days after Thorndyke’s visit that I walked down the
Hampstead Road with the intention of fetching the sketch from the
artist’s-colourman’s. The shop was within a few hundred yards of Jacob
Street, and as I crossed the end of that street, I was just
considering whether I ought to look in on Batson, when a lady bowed to
me and made as if she would stop. It was Mrs. Samway. Of course, I
stopped and shook hands, and while I was making the usual polite
enquiries, I felt myself once more impressed with the unusualness of
the woman. Even in her dress she was unlike other women, though not in
the least eccentric or bizarre. At present, she was clothed from head
to foot in black; but a scarlet bird’s wing in the coquettish little
velvet toque, and a scarlet bow at her throat, gave an effect of
colour that, unusual as it was, harmonized completely and naturally
with her jet-black hair and her strange, un-English beauty.

“So you haven’t started for Paris yet,” I remarked.

“No,” she replied; “my husband has gone and may, perhaps, come back.
At any rate, I am staying in England for the present.”

“Then I may possibly have the pleasure of seeing you again,” I said,
and she graciously replied that she hoped it might be so, as we shook
hands and parted.

A few minutes later, in the artist’s-colourman’s shop, I had another
chance meeting and a more agreeable one. The proprietor had just
produced the sketch, now greatly improved in appearance by being
strained on a stretcher, when the glass door opened and a young lady
entered the shop. Imagine my surprise when that young lady turned out
to be none other than Miss Vyne.

“Well,” I exclaimed, as we mutually recognized each other, “what an
extraordinary coincidence!”

“I don’t see that it is very extraordinary,” she replied. “Most of the
Hampstead people come here because it’s the nearest place where you
can get proper artist’s materials. Is that the sketch you were telling
me about?”

“Yes,” I answered; “and it’s the pick of the loot. But it isn’t too
late to alter your mind. Say the word and it’s yours.”

“Well,” she replied, with a smile, “I am not going to say the word,
but I want to thank you for rescuing those other treasures for me.”

She had, as a matter of fact, already thanked me in a very pretty
little note, but I was not averse to her mentioning the subject again.
We stepped back to the door, and in the brighter light, looked at the
sketch together.

“It’s a pity,” she remarked, “that he handled it so carelessly before
the paint was hard. Those finger-marks wouldn’t matter a bit on a
brush-painted surface; but on the smooth knife-surface they are rather
a disfigurement.”

She placed the sketch in my hand, and I backed nearer to the glass
door to get a better light. Happening to glance up, I noticed that a
sudden and very curious change had come over her; a look of haughty
displeasure and even anger, apparently directed at somebody or
something outside the shop.

For a few moments I took no notice; then, half-unconsciously, I looked
round just as some person moved away from the door. I looked once more
at Miss Vyne. She was quite unmistakably angry. Her cheeks were
flushed and there was a resentful light in her eyes that gave her an
expression quite new to me.

I suppose she caught my enquiring glance for she exclaimed:

“Did you see that woman? I never heard of such impertinence in my
life.”

“What did she do?” I asked.

“She came right up to the doorway and looked over your shoulder; and
then stared at me in the most singular and insolent manner. I could
have slapped her face.”

“Not through the glass door,” I suggested; on which her anger subsided
in a ripple of laughter as quickly as it had arisen. “What was this
objectionable person like?” I asked. “Was she a char-woman or a
slavey?”

“Oh, not at all,” replied Miss Vyne. “Quite a ladylike looking person,
except for her manners. Rather tastefully dressed, too; a black and
vermilion scheme of colour.”

The reply startled me a little. “Had she a scarlet bird’s wing in her
hat?” I asked.

“Yes, and a scarlet bow at her throat. I hope you are not going to say
that you know her.”

It was a rather delicate situation. I could not actually disavow the
acquaintance, but I did not feel inclined to have a black and scarlet
fly introduced into the sweet-smelling ointment of my intercourse with
the fair Sylvia; so I explained with great care the exact scope of the
acquaintance; on which Miss Vyne remarked that “she supposed that
doctors could not be held responsible for the people they knew”; and
proceeded to make her purchases.

I did not take the sketch away with me after all, for it occurred to
me that I might as well leave it to be framed; but instead, I carried
forth with me the parcel containing Miss Vyne’s purchases. I had not
far to carry it, for she was returning at once to Hampstead. I was
tempted to return, for the sake of enjoying a chat with her, too, but
discreetly withstood the temptation, and, having escorted her to a
tram, I turned my face south and walked away at a leisurely pace into
the jaws of an all-unsuspected danger.

It was some hours, however, before anything remarkable happened.

My immediate objective was Lincoln’s Inn Fields, where, at the College
of Surgeons, a lecture on Epidermic Appendages was to be delivered by
the Hunterian Professor; and there, in the college theatre, I spent a
delightful hour while the genial professor took his hearers with him
on a personally-conducted tour among structures that ranged from the
plumage of the sun-bird to the dermal plates of the crocodile, from
the silken locks of beauty to the quills of the porcupine or the mail
of the armadillo.

When I came out, the dusk was just closing in. It was a slightly foggy
evening. The last glow of the sunset in the western sky lighted up the
haze into a rosy background, against which the shadowy buildings were
relieved in shapes of cloudy grey. It was a lovely effect; an effect
such as London alone can show, and fugitive as a breath on a mirror.
As I sauntered westward up the Strand I presently bethought me that,
before the light should have faded completely, I would see how the
effect looked by the riverside. Walking quickly down Buckingham
Street, I came out on to the Embankment and looked into the west. But
the light was nearly gone, the shadows of evening were closing in
fast, and the fog, creeping up the river, ushered in the night.

I leaned on the parapet and watched the last glimmer die away; watched
the darkness deepen on the river and the faint lights on the barges
moored on the southern shore at first twinkle pallidly and then fade
out as the fog thickened. I lit my pipe and looked down at the dark
water swirling past, and gradually fell into a train of half-dreamy
meditation.

Not for the first time since the occurrence, my thoughts turned to
Mrs. Samway. Why had she stared at Miss Vyne in that singular
manner--if indeed it was really Mrs. Samway, and if she really had
stared in the manner alleged? It was an odd affair; but, after all, it
did not very much matter. And with this, my thoughts rambled off in a
new direction.

It was to the cottage on the Heath that they wandered this time, and
the picture of Thorndyke’s cat-like prowlings and pryings arose before
me. That was very queer, too. Was it possible that this learned and
astute man habitually went about eagerly probing into the personal
habits and trivial actions of chance strangers? The apparently puerile
inquisitiveness that he had displayed seemed totally out of character
with all that I knew about the man; but then it often happens that the
private life of public men develops personal traits that are
surprising and disappointing to those who have only known them in
connection with their public activities.

I had become so completely immersed in my thoughts as to be almost
oblivious of what was happening around. Indeed, there was mighty
little happening. The gathering darkness and the thin fog limited my
view to a few square yards. Now and again, a muffled hoot from the
lower river spoke of life and movement on the water, and at long
intervals an occasional wayfarer would pass along the pavement behind
me.

My reflections had reached the point recorded above, when a person
emerged from the obscurity near to the parapet and approached as if to
pass close behind me. I only caught the dusky shape indistinctly with
the tail of my eye; so indistinctly that I could not say certainly
whether it was that of a man or a woman, for I was still gazing down
at the dark water. He or she approached quietly, swerving towards me
across the wide pavement, and was in the act of passing quite close to
me when the thing happened. Of a sudden, I felt my knees clasped in a
powerful grip, and at the same moment I was lifted off my feet and
thrust forward over the parapet. Instinctively, I clutched at the
stonework, but its flat surface offered nothing for my fingers to
grasp. Then my assailant let go, and the next instant I plunged
head-first into the icy water.

It was fortunate for me that the tide was nearly full, else must I,
almost certainly, have broken my neck. As it was, my head struck on
the firm mud at the bottom with such force, that for some moments I
was half-stunned. Nevertheless, I must have struck out automatically,
for when I began to recover my wits my head was above water, and I was
swimming as actively as my clinging garments would let me. But,
apparently, in those moments of dazed semi-consciousness, I must have
struck out towards the middle of the river, for now I was encompassed
by a murky void in which nothing was visible save one or two reddish,
luminous patches--presumably, the lamps on the Embankment.

Towards one of these I turned and struck out vigorously. The water was
desperately cold, and hampered as I was with my clothing, I felt that
I should not be able to keep myself afloat very long, strong swimmer
as I was. The dim, red nebulæ of the unseen lamps moved past slowly,
showing me that I was drifting down on the ebb-tide. Before me, I
knew, was the long, inhospitable wall of the Embankment. True, there
were some steps, if I was not mistaken, by Cleopatra’s Needle, but the
question was whether I had not drifted past them already. I had given
one or two lusty shouts as soon as I had cleared my chest of the
mouthful of water that I got in my first plunge, and I was now letting
off another yell, when, out of the darkness behind me, came a
prolonged hoot.

I looked round quickly in the direction whence the sound had come, and
then became aware of the churning of a propeller. Almost at the same
moment, a dim, ruddy smudge of light broke through the darkness over
the river, and began rapidly to brighten until it took the form of the
twin mast-head lights of a tug with a vessel in tow.

For a moment I hesitated. My first impulse was to avoid the danger of
being run down; but suddenly I altered my mind. For, as the tug bore
down on me, with a roaring of water and a loud clank of machinery, I
saw that she was not absolutely end-on, for her green starboard light,
which had been for a moment visible, suddenly disappeared. Of what
happened during the next few moments, I have but a confused
recollection. A splashing and churning, with the loud wash of water,
the throb of the engines and a glare of light which blazed before my
eyes for a moment, to vanish in an instant into pitchy darkness; a
huge, black object, felt rather than seen to sweep past before me; and
then my hand clutched a wooden projection, and I felt myself dragged
violently through the water. The projection that I had laid hold of
was the lee-board of a sailing barge, as I discovered when the rush of
the water banged me against it; and much ado I had to hold on, with
the water dragging at me and spouting up over my head. But, with what
strength was left to me, I reached out with the other hand and clawed
hold of the dwarf bulwark over which the water was lapping; and so,
with a last violent effort, contrived to drag myself up on to the
deck.

I essayed to stand up, and did, in fact, succeed, but as my sensations
suggested those of a leaden statue with india-rubber legs, I sat down
hastily on the hatch-cover to avoid going overboard. And there I sat
for a minute or two leaning against the lowered mast with my teeth
chattering, and seeming to grow more and more chilled and exhausted
every moment.

Numb as my mind was by this time, my medical instincts told me that
this would not do. Somehow I must get warmth and shelter, for I might
as well have been drowned at once as die of exposure and cold. I
looked round lethargically. There was no sign of anyone on board.
Another barge was towing alongside, and the bows of two others were
dimly visible astern. On those rear-most barges there must certainly
have been someone steering. But they were inaccessible to me, and I
had not the energy to shout; nor could anyone have got across to me if
I had.

Suddenly my eye fell on the little chimney that rose by the cabin
scuttle. A thin stream of smoke issued from it and blew away astern.
Perhaps, then, the crew were below, or, if not, at least there was a
fire. I crawled aft, holding on with my hands, and, pushing back the
scuttle, backed cautiously down the ladder closing the scuttle after
me.

There seemed to be nobody below, and the cabin was in darkness, save
for the glow of the fire that burned in the little grate. The air was
probably warm, though to me it felt icy; but, at least, there was no
wind to play on my wet clothes.

I sat down on the locker as near to the fire as I could, and rested my
elbows on the little triangular table. Chilled to the marrow and
utterly exhausted, I was sensible of a growing desire to sleep; a
desire which I repressed, as I believed, with noble resolution. But
apparently my efforts in this respect were not so successful as I had
supposed, for the next incident opened with suspicious suddenness.

A vigorous shake, which dislodged one of my elbows, introduced the
episode.

I looked up, blinking sulkily, at a bright and most objectionably
dazzling light, which further inspection showed to proceed from a
hurricane lamp held by a rather dirty hand.

“Here, wake up, mister,” said a hoarse voice, “this here ain’t the
Hotel Cecil, you know.”

I sat up and stared vaguely at the speaker, or at least, the holder of
the lamp, but could not think of anything appropriate to say. Then
another voice emerged from nowhere in particular.

“’E’s been overboard, that’s what ’e’s been.”

“Any fool can see that,” said the first man; “but the question is, who
is he and what’s he a-doin’ in my cabin? Who are yer, mister?”

Now, that would seem to be a perfectly simple and straightforward
question. But it is not so simple as it seems. To a complete stranger,
the bare mention of a name is unilluminating. Further explanations are
needed. And at that moment I did not feel equal to explanations.
Besides, I was not so very clear on the subject myself. Consequently,
I preserved a silence which, perhaps, was wooden rather than golden.

“D’ye ’ear?” persisted the first man. “I’m a-arskin’ you a question.”

“What’s the good of arskin’ questions of a man what’s been a-rammin’
’is crumpet aginst the bottom of the river?” protested the other man.

“What d’ye mean?” demanded the first mariner.

“Can’t you see?” retorted the other, “as ’e’s took the ground ’ard?
Look at ’is ’ed.”

Here the first mariner--Lucifer, or lamp-bearer--wiped his hand over
the top of my head and then examined the tip of his forefinger
critically as though it were the arming of a deep-sea lead.

“You’re right, Abel,” said he. “That’s mud off the bottom, that is. He
must have took a regular header. Sooicide perhaps, and altered his
mind. Found it a bit damper’n what he expected. Put the kittle on,
Abe.”

From this moment, the two mariners treated me as if I had been a
lay-figure. Silently, they peeled off my wet clothes, and dried my
skin with vigorous friction as if it had been a wet deck. They not
only asked no further questions, but when I would have spoken they
urged me to economize my wind. They inducted me into stiff and hairy
garments of uncouth aspect, and finally, Abe set before me on the
table a large earthenware mug, the contents of which steamed and
diffused through the cabin a strong odour of Dutch gin.

“You git outside that, mister,” said the luminiferous mariner (who
turned out subsequently to be the skipper), “and then you’d best turn
in.”

The treatment was not strictly orthodox, but I obeyed without demur.
Most people would have done the same under the circumstances. But the
process of “getting outside” it took time, for the grog was boiling
hot and had been brewed with a flexible wrist. By the time that I had
emptied the mug I was not only revived, but (so far as my memory
serves) rather disposed to be garrulously explanatory and facetious. I
even felt a slight inclination to sing. But my friends would stand no
nonsense. As soon as the mug was fairly empty, they bundled me, neck
and crop, into a sort of elongated cupboard and proceeded to pile on
me untold quantities of textile fabrics, including a complete suit of
oilskins. Then they commanded me to go to sleep; which I believe I
must have done almost instantly.




 CHAPTER XI.
 A CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS

Awakening in a strange place is always a memorable experience;
especially to the young, in whom the capacity for novel sensations has
not yet been exhausted by repetition. When I emerged, somewhat
gradually, from the unconsciousness of sleep, my first impressions
concerned themselves with the unusual appearance of the bedroom wall
and its remarkable proximity to my nose. I further noticed that the
bedstead had become inexplicably tilted and that the house appeared to
be swaying; and as I mused on these phenomena with the vagueness of
the half-awake, a loud voice, proceeding apparently from the floor
above, roared out the mystic words, “Lee O!” whereupon there ensued a
sound like the shaking of colossal table cloths and the loud clanking
of chains, and my bedstead took a sharp tilt to the opposite side.
This roused me pretty completely, and, turning over in the bunk, I
looked out into the barge’s cabin.

It was broad daylight and evidently not early, for a square patch of
sunlight crept to and fro on the little table, whence presently it
slipped down to the floor and slithered about unsteadily, as if
Phœbus had overdone his morning dram and could not drive his chariot
straight. I watched it lazily for some time and then, becoming
conscious of a vacancy within, crept out from under the mountain of
bedclothes and made my way to the ladder.

As I put my head through the companion hatch, a man who stood at the
wheel regarded me stolidly.

“So you’ve woke up, have yer?” said he. “Thought you was going right
round the clock. Abel! he’s woke up. Tell young Ted to stand by with
them heggs and that there ’addick.”

Here Abel looked round from behind the luff of the mainsail, and
having verified the statement, conveyed the order to some invisible
person in the fore-peak. Then he came aft with an obvious air of
business. The time for explanations had arrived.

Accordingly I proceeded to “pitch them my yarn,” as they expressed it;
to which they listened with polite attention and manifest
disappointment, clearly regarding the story as a fabrication from
beginning to end. And no wonder. The whole affair was utterly
incredible even to me; to them it must have seemed sheer nonsense.
Their own verdict of “sooicide” during very temporary insanity with
sudden mental recovery, under the influence of cold water, was so much
more rational. Not that they obtruded their views. They listened
patiently and said nothing; and nothing that they could have said
could have been more expressive.

Meanwhile I looked about me with no little surprise. Some miles away
to the south lay a stretch of low land, faint and grey, with a single
salient object, apparently a church with two spires. In every other
direction was the unbroken sea horizon.

“You seem to have made a pretty good passage,” I remarked.

“We’ve had sixteen hours to do it in,” replied the skipper, “and
spring tides and a nice bit of breeze. If it ’ud only hold--which I’m
afraid it won’t--we’d be in Folkestone Harbour this time to-morrow, or
even sooner. Folkestone be much out of your way?”

I smiled at the artlessness of the question. It was undeniable that
the route from Charing Cross to Hampstead by way of Folkestone was
slightly indirect. But there was no need to insist on the fact. My
hospitable friends had acted for the best and their prudence was
justified by the result; for here I was, not a whit the worse for my
ducking save that I badly wanted a bath.

“Folkestone will suit me quite well,” I replied, “if there is enough
money left in my pockets to pay my fare home.”

“That’s all right,” said the skipper. “I cleared out your pockets
myself. You’ll find the things in a mug in the starboard locker.
Better overhaul ’em when you go below and see if you’ve dropped
anything. Here comes young Ted with your grub.”

As he spoke the apprentice rose through the fore-hatch like a stage
apparition--if one can imagine an apparition burdened with a tin
tea-pot, two “heggs” and an “’addick”--and came grinning along the
weather side-deck, to vanish through the cabin hatchway. I followed
gleefully, and, almost before young Ted had finished the somewhat
informal table arrangements, fell to on the food with voracious joy.

“If you want any more eggs or anythink,” said the apprentice, “all
you’ve got to do is just to touch the electric bell and the waiter’ll
come and take your orders,” and having delivered this delicate shaft
of irony he presented me with an excellent back view of a pair of
brown dreadnoughts as he retired up the ladder.

As I consumed the rough but excellent breakfast I reflected on the
strange events that had placed me in my present odd situation. For the
first time, I began fairly to realize that I was in some way involved
in a nexus of circumstances that I did not in the least understand. I
had an enemy; a vindictive enemy, too, in whose eyes mere human life
was a thing of no account. But who could he be? I knew of no one on
whom I had ever inflicted the smallest injury. I bore no man any
grudge and had never to my knowledge had unfriendly dealings with any
human creature. Was this inveterate enemy of mine anyone whom I knew?
Or was he some stranger whose path I had crossed without knowing it,
and whom I should not recognize even if I saw him?

This last supposition was highly disquieting, especially as it seemed
rather probable; for if my enemy was unknown to me, what precautions
could I take?

Then, again, there was the question! What was the occasion of this
extraordinary vendetta? What had I done to this man that he should
pursue me with such deadly purpose? As to Jervis’s suggestion, that I
had seen something at the Samways’ house that I was not wanted to see,
there was nothing in it; for, as a matter of fact, I had seen nothing.
There was nothing to see. The man Maddock was certainly dead. As to
what he died of, that was Batson’s affair; but even in that there was
no sign of anything suspicious. The man himself had consulted Batson,
and had thought so badly of himself that he had made his will in
Batson’s presence. The patient himself was fully aware of his serious
condition; it was only Batson, with his eternal hurry and bustle and
his defective eyesight, who had missed observing it. The only
circumstance that supported Jervis’s view was that the acts of
violence seemed to be connected with the locality of Batson’s house.

Of course there remained the mystery of the dead priest or
lay-brother. But with that these attempts seemed to have no
connection. Nor was there any reason why the murderer should pursue
me. I had seen the body, it is true; but nobody believed me and no
proceedings were being taken. Nor could I have identified the murderer
if I had been confronted with him. Clearly, he had nothing to fear
from me.

From the causes of my present predicament I passed to the immediate
future. I should have to get back from Folkestone, and I ought to send
a telegram to my landlady, Mrs. Blunt, who would probably be in a
deuce of a twitter about me. I raised the lid of the locker, and,
reaching out the big earthenware mug, emptied its contents on the
table. All my portable property seemed to be there, including the
little gold reliquary, which I had carelessly carried in my pocket
ever since I had shown it to Thorndyke. My available funds were some
four or five pounds; amply sufficient to get me home and to discharge
my liability to the skipper as well. I swept the things back into the
mug, which I returned to the locker, and having cut myself another
thick slice of bread, proceeded with the largest breakfast that I have
ever eaten.

The skipper’s forebodings were justified by the course of events. When
I came on deck the breeze had died down to a mere faint breath, hardly
sufficient to keep the big red main-sail asleep--as the pretty old
nautical phrase has it. The skipper was still at the wheel and Abel
was anxiously taking soundings with a hand-lead.

“You won’t do it, Bill,” said the latter, coiling up the lead-line
with an air of finality, “this ’ere breeze is a-petering right out.”

The skipper said nothing, but stared gloomily at the land which was
now right ahead and much nearer than when I had last looked; and from
the land his eye travelled to a sand-bank from which rose a tall post
at the top of which was an inverted cone.

“Ought to a-gone about a bit sooner, Bill,” pursued Abel; whereupon
the skipper turned on him fiercely.

“What’s the good o’ saying that now?” he demanded. “If you’d a-told me
the wind was going to drop, I’d a-gone about sooner. What water is
there?”

“Five fathom here,” replied Abel; “that means one and a quarter on the
Woolpack. You’d best shove her nose round now, Bill.”

“Oh, all right!” retorted the skipper, “Lee O! This is going to be an
all-night job, this is,” and with this gloomy prediction, he spun the
wheel round viciously, and once more headed away from the land.

Prophecy appeared to be the skipper’s specialty and, like most
prophets, he tended to view the future with an unfavourable eye.
Gradually the breeze died away into a dead calm, so that we had
presently to let go the anchor to avoid drifting on to a great
sand-bank which now lay between us and the land. And here we remained
not only for the rest of the day and the succeeding night, as the
skipper had promised, but throughout the whole of the next day and
following night.

I have already remarked on the incalculable chances by which the
course of a man’s life is determined. Looking back now, I see that the
skipper’s little miscalculation and his failure to cross the Woolpack
Shoal into the inshore channel, was an antecedent determining the most
momentous consequences for me. For had the barge been becalmed in the
inshore channel, I could, and should, have landed in the boat and
returned home forthwith; and if I had, certain events would not have
happened and my life might have run a very different course. As it
was, miles of sea and the great bank known as the Margate Sand, lay
between me and the shore; whence I was committed to the wanderings and
dallyings of the barge as irrevocably as if we were crossing the
Pacific.

We lay, then, in the Queen’s Channel, outside Margate Sand, for two
whole days and nights; during which time the skipper and Abel slept
much and smoked more, and young Ted, having cleaned and dried my
clothes, inducted me into the art of bottom-fishing. On the third day,
a faint breath of breeze enabled us to crawl round the North Foreland,
and the skipper having elected to pass outside the Goodwin, managed to
get becalmed again in the neighbourhood of the East Goodwin Lightship.
A little breeze at night enabled us to move on a few miles farther;
and so we continued to crawl along at intervals, mainly on the tide,
until nine o’clock in the morning of the fifth day, when we finally
crawled into Folkestone Harbour.

As soon as the barge was brought up to a buoy, young Ted was detailed
to put me ashore in the boat. The skipper and Abel had insisted on
treating me as a guest, and I had perforce to accept the position. But
young Ted had no such pride; and when I ran up the wooden steps by the
old fish-market, I left him on the stage below, staring with an
incredulous grin at a gold coin in his none-too-delicate palm.

I was not sorry to be landed in this unfashionable quarter of the
town, for in spite of young Ted’s efforts, my turn-out left much to be
desired, especially in the matter of shirt-cuffs and collar, and I
was, moreover, hatless and somewhat imperfectly shaved. Accordingly, I
slunk inconspicuously past the market and the groups of lounging
fishermen, and when I saw a well-dressed, lady-like woman preceding me
into the little narrow street, known as the Stade, I slackened my pace
so as not to overtake her. She sauntered along with a leisurely air as
if she were waiting for something or somebody, and this and the fact
that she carried a light canvas portmanteau and a rug, suggested to me
that she was probably travelling by the cross-channel boat which was
due to start presently.

Suddenly my attention was diverted from her by a loud chattering and a
series of shouts. A small crowd of men and women ran excitedly past
the end of the little street. The clattering rapidly drew nearer; and
then a horse, with a light van, swept round the corner and passing
under an archway, advanced at a furious gallop. Evidently the horse
had bolted and now, mad with terror, dashed forward with trailing
reins, zigzagging erratically and making the van sway to and fro, so
that it took up the whole of the narrow street. The few wayfarers
darted into doorways and sheltered corners, and I was about to secure
my own safety in a similar manner, when I noticed that the woman in
front of me had apparently become petrified with terror, for she stood
stock still, gazing helplessly at the approaching horse. It was no
time for ceremony. The infuriated animal and the swaying van were
thundering up the street like an insane Juggernaut. With a hasty
apology, I seized the woman from behind, and half-dragged,
half-carried her to the opening of a little yard beside a sail-loft.
And even then, I was hardly quick enough, for as the van roared past,
some projecting object struck me between the shoulders and sent me
flying, face downwards, on to a pile of tarred drift-net.

I had had the presence of mind to let go, as I was struck, so that my
fair protegée was not involved in my downfall; but in a moment, she
was stooping over me, and with many expressions of concern,
endeavouring to help me to rise. Beyond a thump in the back, however,
I was not hurt in the least, but picked myself up, grinning and turned
to reassure her. And then I really did get a shock; for as I turned,
the woman gave a shriek and fell back on the steps of the sail-loft,
gasping, and staring at me with an expression of the utmost
astonishment and terror. I supposed the accident had upset her nerves;
but to be sure, my own received, as I have said, a pretty severe
shock. For the woman was Mrs. Samway.

We remained for a moment or two gazing at one another in mute
astonishment. Then I recollected myself, and advanced to shake hands;
but to my discomfiture, she shrank away from me and began to sob and
laugh in an unmistakably hysterical fashion. I must confess that I was
somewhat surprised at these manifestations in so robust a woman as
Mrs. Samway. Unreasonably so, indeed, for all women-kind are more or
less prone to hysteria; but whereas the normal woman tends to laugh
and cry, the weaker vessels develop inexplicable diseases, with a
tendency to social reform and emancipation.

I put on my best bedside manner, at once matter-of-fact and
persuasive. “You seem quite upset,” I said, “and all about nothing,
for the poor beggar of a horse must be half a mile away by now.”

“Yes,” she answered shakily, “it’s ridiculous of me, but it was so
sudden and so--” here she laughed noisily, and as the laugh ended in a
portentous sniff, I hastened to continue the conversation.

“Yes, it was a bit of a facer to see that beast coming up the street
as if it was Tottenham Corner. Why on earth didn’t you get out of the
way?”

“I am sure I don’t know,” she answered. “I seemed to be paralyzed and
idiotic and--” here the laughter began again.

“Well,” I interrupted cheerfully, “you didn’t get rolled on those
tarred nets, so that’s something to be thankful for.”

This was a rather unlucky shot, for the semblance of facetiousness
started a most alarming train of giggles, interrupted by rather loud
sobs; but at this point, a new curative influence made itself
manifest. Two smack boys halted outside the opening and surveyed her
with frank interest and pleased surprise. Simultaneously, an elderly
mariner appeared at the door of the sail-loft, grasping a black bottle
and a tea-cup, and rather shyly descending the steps, suggested that
“perhaps a drop o’ sperits might do the lady good.”

Mrs. Samway bounced off the steps, her hitherto pale cheeks aflame
with anger. “I am making a fool of myself,” she exclaimed. “Let us go
away from here.”

She walked out into the street, and I, having thanked the old
gentleman for his most efficacious remedy, followed. As soon as I
caught her up, she turned on me quickly and held out her hand.

“Good-bye, Dr. Jardine,” she said, “and thank you so very much for
risking your life for a--for a wretched giggling woman.”

“Oh, you’re not going to send me packing like this,” I protested,
“when we’ve hardly said good morning. Besides, you’re not fit to be
left. But you’re not to begin laughing again,” I added, threateningly,
for an ominous twitching of her mouth seemed to herald a relapse, “or
I shall go back and get that black bottle.”

She shook her head impatiently, but without looking at me. “I would
rather you went away, Dr. Jardine,” she said in an agitated voice. “I
would, really. I wish to be alone. Don’t think me ungracious. I am
really most grateful to you, but I would rather you left me now.”

Of course there was nothing more to be said. She was not really ill or
in need of assistance, and probably her instinct was right. Hysteria
is not one of those affections which waste their sweetness on the
desert air. I shook her hand cordially and, advising her to keep out
of the way of stray vans and horses, once more pursued my way towards
the town, meditating as I went, on the oddity of the whole affair. It
was an astonishing coincidence that I should have run against this
woman in this out of the way place. I had left her but a few days
since apparently firmly rooted in the Hampstead Road, and now, behold,
as I step ashore from the barge, she is almost the first person that I
meet. And yet the coincidence, which had evidently hit her as hard as
it had me, like most coincidences, tended to disappear on closer
inspection. The only really odd feature was my own presence in
Folkestone. As to Mrs. Samway, she had probably been sent for by her
husband, and was crossing by the boat that was now due to start.

Her anxiety to get rid of me was more puzzling, until I suddenly
remembered my bare head, my crumpled collar and generally raffish and
disreputable appearance. The latter was, in fact, at this moment
brought to my notice by a man, with whom, in my preoccupation, I
collided; who first uttered an impatient exclamation and then,
bestowing on me a quick stare of astonishment, muttered a hasty
apology and hurried past. The incident emphasized the necessity for
some reform, and I mended my pace towards the region of shops in a
very ferment of uncomfortable self-consciousness.

With the purchase of a new hat, a collar, a pair of cuffs, a neck-tie,
a pair of gloves and a stick, some faint glimmer of self-respect
revived in me. I was even conscious of a temptation to linger in
Folkestone and spend a few hours by the sea; but a sense of duty,
aided by a large, muddy stain on my coat, finally decided me to return
to town at once. Accordingly, having sent off a telegram to my
landlady and ascertained that a train left for London in about twenty
minutes, I betook myself to the station.

There were comparatively few people travelling by this particular
train; in fact, when I had established myself with the morning paper
in the off-side corner seat of a smoking compartment, I began, with an
Englishman’s proverbial unsociability, to congratulate myself on the
prospect of having the compartment to myself, when my hopes were
dashed by the entrance of an elderly clergyman; who not only broke up
my solitude, but aggravated the offence by quite unnecessarily seating
himself opposite to me. I was almost tempted to move to another
corner, for my length of leg gives an added value to space; but it
seemed a rude thing to do; and as the train moved off at this moment,
I resigned myself to the trifling discomfort.

My clerical friend was a somewhat uncommon-looking man, with a
countenance at once strong and secretive; a rectangular, masterful
face, with a bull-like dew-lap and a small, and very sharp, Roman
nose. On further inspection, I decided that he was either a
High-Church parson or a Roman Catholic priest. His proceedings seemed
to favour the latter hypothesis, for the train was barely out of the
station before he had whisked out of his pocket an
ecclesiastical-looking volume, which he opened at a marked place, and
instantly began to read. I watched him with inquisitive interest, for
his manner of reading was very singular. There was something habitual,
almost mechanical, about it, suggesting an allotted and familiar task,
and a lack of concentration that suggested a corresponding lack of
novelty in the matter. As he read, his lips moved, and now and again I
caught a faint whisper, by which I gathered that he was reading
rapidly; but the most singular phenomenon was, that when his eyes
strayed out of the carriage window, as they did at frequent intervals,
his lips went on sputtering with unabated rapidity. Quite suddenly he
appeared to come to the end of a sort of literary measured mile, for
even as his lips were still moving, he clapped in the book-mark, shut
the volume, and returned it to his pocket with a curious air of
business-like finality.

As his eyes were no longer occupied with the book, my observations had
to be suspended, and my attention was now turned to my own affairs.
Putting my hand in my coat pocket for my pipe and pouch, I became
aware of a state of confusion in the said pocket which I had already
noticed when making my purchases. The fact is, that I had nearly come
away from the barge without my portable property. It was only at the
last moment that the skipper, remembering the mug, had fetched it
hurriedly from the locker and shot its contents bodily into my coat
pocket. The present seemed a good opportunity for distributing the
various articles among their proper receptacles. Accordingly I turned
out the whole pocketful on the seat by my side, and a remarkably
miscellaneous collection they formed; comprising knives, pencils,
match-box, keys, the minor implements of my craft, and various other
objects, useful and useless, including the little gold reliquary.

My neighbour opposite was, I think, quite interested in my
proceedings, though he kept up a dignified pretence of being entirely
unaware of my existence. Only for a while, however. Suddenly he sat
up, very wide awake, and slewing his head round, stared with
undisguised intentness at my little collection. I guessed at once what
it was that had attracted his attention. A cleric would not be
thrilled by the sight of a clinical thermometer or an ophthalmoscope.
It was the reliquary that had caught his eye. That was an article in
his own line of business.

With deliberate mischief, I left the little bauble exposed to view as
I very slowly and methodically conveyed the other things one by one,
each to its established pocket. Last of all, I picked up the reliquary
and held it irresolutely as if debating where I should stow it. And at
this point His Reverence intervened, unable any longer to contain his
curiosity.

“Zat is a very remargable liddle opchect, sir,” he said in excellent
Anglo-German. “Might one bresume to ask vat its use is?”

I handed the reliquary to him and he took it from me with
ill-disguised eagerness.

“I understand,” said I, “that it is a reliquary. But you probably know
more about such things than I do. I haven’t opened it so I can’t say
what is inside.”

He nodded gravely. “Zo! I am glad to hear you zay zat. Brobably zere
is inside some holy relic vich ought not to be touched egzepting by
bious handts.” He turned the case over, and, putting on a pair of
spectacles--which he had not appeared to require for reading--closely
scrutinized the inscriptions, and even the wisp of cord that remained
attached to one of the rings.

“You zay,” he resumed without raising his eyes, “zat you understandt
zat zis is a reliquary. Do you not zen know? Ze berson who gafe it to
you, did he not tell you vat it gondained?”

“It wasn’t given to me at all,” I replied. “In fact, it isn’t properly
mine. I picked it up and am merely keeping it until I find the owner.”

He pondered this statement with a degree of profundity that seemed
rather out of proportion to its matter; and he continued to gaze at
the reliquary, never once raising his eyes to mine. At length, after a
considerable pause and a most unnecessary amount of reflection, he
asked:

“Might one ask, if you shall bardon my guriosity, vere you found zis
liddle opchect?”

I hesitated before replying. My first, and natural, impulse was to
tell him exactly where and under what circumstances I had found the
“opchect.” But the way in which my information had been received by
the police had made me rather chary of offering confidences; besides
which, I had half promised them not to talk about the affair. And,
after all, it was no business of this good gentleman’s where I found
it. My answer was, therefore, not very explicit.

“I picked it up in a lane at Hampstead, near London.”

“At Hampstead!” he repeated. “Zo! Zat would be--a--very good blace to
find such sings. I mean,” he added, hastily, “zere are many beople in
zat blace and some of zem will be of ze old religion.”

Now, this last remark was such palpable nonsense that it set me
speculating on what he had intended to say, for it was obvious that he
had altered his mind in the middle of the sentence and completed it
with the first words that came to hand. However, as I could read no
sense into it at all, I said that “perhaps he was right,” which seemed
an eminently safe rejoinder to an unintelligible statement.

When he had finished his minute examination of the reliquary, he
handed it back to me with such evident reluctance that, if it had been
mine, I should have been tempted to ask him to accept it. But it was
not mine. I was only a trustee. So I made no remark, but watched him
as he, very deliberately, took off his spectacles and returned them to
their case, looking meanwhile, at the floor with an air of deep
abstraction. He appeared to be thinking hard, and I was quite curious
as to what his next remark would be. A considerable interval elapsed
before he spoke again; but at last the remark came, in the form of a
question, and very disappointing it was.

“You are not berhaps very much interested in relics and reliquaries?”

As a matter of fact, I didn’t care two straws for either the one or
the other; but there was no need to put it as strongly as that.

“We are apt,” I replied, “to find a lack of interest in subjects of
which we are ignorant.” (That was a fine sentence. It might have come
straight out of Sandford and Merton.)

“Zat is vat I sink, too,” he rejoined. “Ve do not know; ve do not
care. But zere is a very egsellent liddle book vich egsplains all ze
gustoms and zeremonies gonnected vid relics of ze zaints. I should
like you to read zat book. Vill you bermit me to send you a gobby vich
I haf?”

Of course I said I should be delighted. It was an outrageous
falsehood, but what else could I say?

“Zen,” said he, “I shall haf great pleasure in zending it to you if
you vill kindly tell me how I shall address it.”

I presented him with my card, which he read very attentively before
bestowing it in his pocket-book.

“I see,” he remarked, “zat you are a doctor of medecine. It is a fine
brofession, if one does not too much vorget ze spiritual life in
garing for zat of ze body.”

In this I acquiesced vaguely, and the conversation drifted into
detached commonplaces, finally petering out as we approached Paddock
Wood; where my reverend acquaintance bought a newspaper and underwent
a total eclipse behind it.

As soon as the train started again, I took up my own paper; and the
very first glance at it gave me a shock of surprise that sent all
other matters clean out of my mind. It was an advertisement in the
column headed “Personal” that attracted my attention, an advertisement
that commenced with the word “Missing,” in large type, and went on to
offer Two Hundred Pounds Reward: thus:--


 “MISSING. TWO HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD.

 “Whereas, on the 14th inst., Dr. Humphrey Jardine disappeared from his
 home and his usual places of resort; the above reward will be paid to
 any person who shall give information as to his whereabouts, if alive,
 or the whereabouts of his body if he is dead. He was last seen at
 12.20 p.m. on the above date in the Hampstead Road, and was then
 walking towards Euston Road. The missing man is about twenty-six years
 of age; is somewhat over six feet in height; of medium complexion; has
 brown hair, grey eyes, straight nose and a rather thin face, which is
 clean-shaved. He was wearing a dark tweed suit, and soft felt hat.

 “Information should be given to Hector Brodribb, Esquire, 65, New
 Square, Lincoln’s Inn, by whom the above reward will be paid.”


Here was a pretty state of affairs: It seemed that while I was
placidly taking events as they came; smoking the skipper’s tobacco and
bottom-fishing with young Ted; my escapade had been producing
somewhere a most almighty splash. I read the advertisement again, with
a self-conscious grin, and out of it there arose one or two rather
curious questions. In the first place, who the deuce was Hector
Brodribb? And what concern was I of his? And how came he to know that
I was walking down Hampstead Road at 12.20 on the 14th inst.?

I felt very little doubt it was actually Thorndyke who was tweaking
the strings of the Brodribbian puppet. But even this left the mystery
unsolved. For how did Thorndyke know? This was only the fifth day
after my disappearance, and it would seem that there had hardly been
time for exhaustive enquiries.

Then another highly interesting fact emerged. The only person who had
seen me walk away down Hampstead Road was Sylvia Vyne; whence it
followed that Thorndyke, or the mysterious Brodribb, had in some way
got into touch with her. And reflecting on this, the mechanism of the
enquiry came into view. The connecting-link was, of course, the
sketch. Thorndyke had, himself, left the canvas with Mr. Robinson, the
artist’s-colourman, and he must have called to enquire if I had
collected it. Then, he would have been told of my meeting with Miss
Vyne, and as she was a regular customer, Mr. Robinson would have been
able to give him her address. It was all perfectly simple, the only
remarkable feature being the extraordinary promptitude with which the
inquiry had been carried out. Which went to show how much more clearly
Thorndyke had realized the danger that surrounded me than I had
myself.

These various reflections gave me full occupation during the remainder
of the journey, extending themselves into consideration of how I
should act in the immediate future. My first duty was obviously to
report myself to Thorndyke without delay; after which, I persuaded
myself, it would be highly necessary for me personally to reassure the
fair, and, perhaps, anxious Sylvia. As to how this was to be managed,
I was not quite clear, and in spite of the most profound cogitation, I
had reached no conclusion when the train rumbled into Charing Cross
Station.




 CHAPTER XII.
 MISS VYNE

As I stepped out on to the platform with a valedictory bow to my
reverend fellow-passenger, my irresolution came to an end and my duty
became clear. I must, in common decency, report myself at once to
Thorndyke, seeing that he had been at so much trouble on my account.
His card, which he had given me, I had unfortunately--or perhaps
fortunately, as it turned out--left on the mantelpiece at my lodgings;
but I remembered that the address was King’s Bench Walk and assumed
that I should have no difficulty in finding the house. Nor had I, for,
as I entered the Temple by the Tudor Street gate--having overshot my
mark on the Embankment--I was almost immediately confronted by a fine
brick doorway surmounted by a handsome pediment and bearing legibly
painted on its jamb, “First pair, Dr. Thorndyke.”

I ascended the “first pair” of stairs, which brought me to an open oak
door, massive and iron-bound, and a closed inner door, on the brass
knocker of which I executed a flourish that would have done credit to
a Belgravian footman; whereupon the door opened and a small man of
sedate and clerical aspect regarded me with an air of mild enquiry.

“Is Dr. Thorndyke at home?” I asked.

“No, sir. He is at the hospital.”

“Dr. Jervis?”

“Is watching a case in the Probate Court. Perhaps you would like to
leave a message or write a note. A message in writing would be
preferable.”

“I don’t know that it’s necessary,” said I. “My name is Jardine, and
if you tell him that I called that will probably be enough.”

The little man gave me a quick, bird-like glance of obviously
heightened interest.

“If you are Dr. Humphrey Jardine,” said he, “I think a few explanatory
words would be acceptable. The Doctor has been extremely uneasy about
you. A short note and an appointment, either here or at the hospital,
would be desirable.”

With this he stepped back, holding the door invitingly open, and I
entered, wondering who the deuce this prim little cathedral dean might
be, with his persuasive manners and his quaintly precise forms of
speech. He placed a chair for me at the table, and, having furnished
me with writing materials, stood a little way off, unobtrusively
examining me as I wrote. I had finished the short letter, closed it up
and addressed it, and was rising to go, when, almost automatically, I
took out my watch and glanced at it. Of course it had stopped.

“Can you tell me the time?” I asked.

My acquaintance drew out his own watch and replied deliberately:
“Seventeen minutes and forty seconds past one.” He paused for a moment
and then added: “I hope, sir, you have not got any water into your
watch.”

“I’m afraid I have,” I replied, rather taken aback by the rapidity of
his diagnosis. “But I’ll just wind it up to make sure.”

“Oh, don’t do that, sir!” he exclaimed. “Allow me to examine it before
you disturb the movement.” He whipped out of his pocket a watchmaker’s
eyeglass, which miraculously glued itself to his eye, and, having
taken a brief glance at the opened watch, produced a minute pocket
screw-driver and a sheet of paper; and, in the twinkling of an eye, as
it seemed to me, the paper was covered with the dismembered structures
which had in their totality formed my timepiece.

“It’s quite a small matter, sir,” was his report, as he rose from his
inspection and pocketed his eye-glass. “Just a speck or two of rust.
If you will take my watch for the present, I will have your own in
going order by the next time you call.”

It seemed an odd transaction; but the little man’s manner, though
quiet, was so decisive that I took his proffered watch, and, affixing
it to my chain, thanked him for his kindness and departed, wondering
if it was possible that this prim, clerical little person could
possibly be the “tame mechanic” of whom Thorndyke had spoken.

Travelling in London was comparatively slow in those days--which,
perhaps, was none the worse for a near and pleasant suburb like
Hampstead; it had turned half-past two when I let myself into my
lodgings with a rather rusty key and almost literally, fell into the
arms of Mrs. Blunt. I feared, for a moment, that she was going to kiss
me. But that was a false alarm. What she actually did was to seize
both my hands and burst into tears with such violence as to cover me
with confusion and cause the servant maid to rise like a domestic, and
highly inquisitive, apparition from the kitchen stairs. I pacified
Mrs. Blunt as well as I could and shook hands heartily with the maid,
who thereupon retired, much gratified, to the underworld, whence
presently issued an odour suggestive of sacrificial rites, not
entirely unconnected with fried onions, and accompanied by an
agreeable hissing sound.

“But wherever have you been all this time?” Mrs. Blunt asked, as she
preceded me up the stairs wiping her eyes, “and why didn’t you send us
a line just to say that you were all right?”

To this question I made a somewhat guarded answer in so far as the
cause of my immersion in the river was concerned; otherwise I gave her
a fairly correct account of my adventures.

“Well, well,” was her comment, “I suppose it was all for the best, but
I do think those sailors might have put you on shore somewhere. Dear
me, what a time it has been. I couldn’t sleep at night for thinking of
you, and what Susan and I have eaten between us wouldn’t have kept a
sparrow alive. And Dr. Thorndyke, too, I’m sure he was very anxious
and worried about you, though he is such a quiet, self-contained man
that you can’t tell what he is thinking of. And Lord; what a lot of
questions he do ask, to be sure!”

“By the way, how did he come to know that I was missing?”

“Why, I told him, of course. When you didn’t come home that
night--which Susan and me sat up for you until three in the morning--I
thought there must be something wrong, you being so regular in your
habits; so next day, the very first thing, I took his card from your
mantelpiece and down I went to his office and told him what had
happened. He came up here that evening to see if you had come home,
and he’s been here every day since to enquire.”

“Has he really?”

“Yes. In a hansom cab. Every single day. And so has the young lady.”

“The young lady!” I exclaimed. “What young lady?”

Mrs. Blunt regarded me with something as nearly approaching a wink as
can be imagined in association with an elderly female of sedate
aspect.

“Now,” she protested slyly, “as if you didn’t know! What young lady
indeed! Why, Miss Vyne, to be sure; and a very sweet young lady she
is, and talked to me just as simple and friendly as if she’d been an
ordinary young woman.”

“How do you know that she isn’t an ordinary young woman?” I asked.

Mrs. Blunt was shocked. “Do you suppose, Mr. Jardine, sir,” she
demanded severely, “that I who have been a head parlour-maid in a
county family where my poor husband was coachman, don’t know a real
gentlewoman when I meet one? You surprise me, sir.”

I apologized hastily and suggested that, as so many kind enquiries had
been made, the least I could do was to call and return thanks without
delay.

“Certainly, sir,” Mrs. Blunt agreed; “but not until you have had your
lunch. It’s a small porterhouse steak,” she added alluringly, being
evidently suspicious of my intentions. The announcement, seconded by
an appetizing whiff from below, reminded me that I was prodigiously
sharp set, having tasted no food since I had come ashore at
Folkestone, and put the grosser physiological needs of the body, for
the moment, in the ascendant. But even as I was devouring the steak
with voracious gusto, my mind occupied itself with plans for a
strategic descent on the abode of the fair Sylvia and with
speculations on the reception I should get; and the noise of water
running into the bath formed a pleasing accompaniment to the final
mouthfuls.

When I had bathed, shaved and attired myself in carefully selected
garments, I set forth, as smart and spruce as the frog that would
a-wooing go--saving the opera hat, which would have been inappropriate
to the occasion. The distance to Sylvia’s house was not great, and a
pair of long and rapidly-moving legs consumed it to such purpose that
it was still quite reasonable calling time when I opened the gate of
“The Hawthorns” and gave a modest pull at the bell. My summons was
answered by a rather foolish-looking maid, by whom I was informed that
Miss Vyne was at home, and when I had given her my name--which she
seemed disposed to confuse with that of a well-known edible fish--she
ushered me down a passage to a room at the back of the house, and,
opening the door, announced me--correctly, I was glad to note;
whereupon I assumed an ingratiating smile and entered.

Now there is nothing more disconcerting than a total failure of
agreement between anticipation and realization. Unconsciously, I had
pictured to myself the easy-mannered, genial Sylvia, seated, perhaps,
at an easel or table, working on one of her pictures, and had prepared
myself for a reception quite simple, friendly and unembarrassing.
Confidently and entirely at my ease, I walked in through the doorway;
and there the pleasant vision faded, leaving me with the smile frozen
on my face, staring in consternation at one of the most appalling old
women that it has ever been my misfortune to encounter.

I am, in general, rather afraid of old women. They are, to my mind, a
rather alarming class of creature; but the present specimen exceeded
my wildest nightmares. It was not merely that she was seated
unnaturally in the exact centre of the room and that she sat with
unhuman immobility, moving no muscle and uttering no sound as I
entered, though that was somewhat embarrassing. It was her strange,
forbidding appearance that utterly shattered my self-possession and
seemed to disturb the very marrow in my bones.

She was a most remarkable-looking person. An immense Roman nose, a mop
of frizzy grey fringe and a lofty surmounting cap or head-dress of
some kind, suggested that monstrous and unreal bird, the helmeted
hornbill; and the bird-like character was heightened by her eyes,
which were small and glittering and set in the midst of a multitude of
radiating wrinkles.

To this most alarming person I made a low bow--and dropped my stick,
of which the maid had neglected to relieve me and for which I had
found no appointed receptacle. As I stooped hastily to pick it up, my
hat slipped from my grasp, and, urged by the devil that possesses
disengaged hats, instantly rolled under a deep ottoman, whence I had
to hook it out with the handle of my stick. I rose, perspiring with
embarrassment, to confront that immovable figure, and found the
glittering eyes fixed on me attentively but without any sign of
expression of human emotion. Haltingly I essayed to stammer out an
explanation of my visit.

“Er--I have--er--called--” Here I paused to collect my ideas and the
old lady watched me stonily without offering any remark; indeed no
comment was needed on a statement so self-evidently true. After a
brief and hideous silence I began again.

“I--er--thought it desirable--er--and in fact necessary
and--er--proper to call--er and--”

Here my ideas again petered out and a horrid silence ensued, amidst
which I heard a still, emotionless voice murmur:

“Yes. And you have accordingly called.”

“Exactly,” I agreed, grasping eagerly at the slenderest straw of
suggestion. “I have called to--er--well, the fact is that my--er--very
remarkable absence seemed to call for some explanation, especially as
certain enquiries--er--”

At this point I stopped suddenly with a horrible doubt as to whether I
was not saying more than was discreet; and the misgiving was
intensified by that chilly, calm voice, framing the question:

“Enquiries made personally?”

Now this was a facer. I seemed to have put my foot in it at the first
lead off. Supposing Sylvia had said nothing about her little visits to
Mrs. Blunt? It would never do to give her away to this inquisitorial
old waxwork. I endeavoured to temporize.

“Well,” I stammered, “not exactly made personally to me.”

“By letter, perhaps?” the voice suggested in the same even, impassive
tone.

“Er--no. Not by letter.”

There was a short embarrassing pause, and then the old lady, as if
summing up the case, said frigidly:

“Not exactly personally and not by letter.”

I was so utterly confounded by her judicial manner, her immovable,
expressionless face and the hypnotic quality of those glittering eyes,
that for the moment I could think of nothing to say.

“Don’t let me interrupt you,” said she after some seconds of agonized
silence on my part; whereupon I pulled myself together and made a
fresh start.

“I should, perhaps, have explained that I have been unavoidably absent
from home for some time, and, as I was unable to communicate with my
friends, I have, I am afraid, caused them some anxiety. It was this
that seemed to make it necessary for me to call and give an account of
myself.”

She pondered awhile on this statement--if a graven image can be said
to ponder--and at length enquired:

“You spoke of your friends. Are any of them known to me?”

“Well,” I replied, “I was referring more particularly to your
daughter.”

She continued to regard me fixedly, and, after a brief interval,
rejoined:

“You are referring to my daughter. But I do not recall the existence
of any such person. I think you must be mistaken.”

It seemed extremely probable, and I hastened to amend the description.

“I beg your pardon. I should have said Miss Vyne. But perhaps she is
not at home.”

“You are evidently mistaken,” was the paralyzing reply. “I am Miss
Vyne; and I need not add that I am at home.”

“But,” I demanded despairingly, “is there not another Miss Vyne?”

“There is not,” she answered. “But it is possible that you are
referring to Miss Sylvia Vyne. Is that so?”

I replied sulkily that it was; and being somewhat nettled by this
unnecessary and rather offensive hair-splitting, offered no further
remark. How the conversation would have proceeded after this, I cannot
even surmise. But it did not proceed at all, for the embarrassing
silence was brought to an end by a very agreeable interruption. The
door opened softly and for one moment Sylvia herself stood framed in
the portal; then, with a little cry, she ran towards me with her hands
held out impulsively and the prettiest smile of welcome.

“So it is really you!” she exclaimed. “That silly little goose of a
maid has only just told me you were here. I _am_ glad to see you. When
did you graciously please to descend from the clouds?”

“I arrived home this afternoon, and as soon as I had changed and had
lunch I came here to report myself.”

“How nice of you,” said Sylvia. “I suppose you guessed how anxious we
should be?”

“I didn’t presume to think that you would actually be anxious about
me,” I replied, with a furtive eye on the waxwork, “though I knew that
you had been kind enough to express an interest in my fate.”

“What a cold-bloodedly polite way to put it!” laughed Sylvia.
“‘Express an interest,’ indeed! We were most dreadfully worried about
you.”

To a somewhat friendless man like myself this sympathetic warmth was
very delightful, and my pleasure was not appreciably damped when a
chill, emotionless voice affirmed:

“The use of the first person singular would, I think, be preferable.”

Sylvia turned on her aunt with mock ferocity.

“Well, really,” she exclaimed. “You are a dreadful impostor, Mopsy,
dear! Just listen to her, Dr. Jardine. And if you had only seen what a
twitter she was in as the time went on and no news came!”

I gasped, and the hair seemed to stir on my scalp. Mopsy! The name was
obviously not applied to me. But could it be--was it possible that
such a name could be associated with that terrific old lady? It was
inconceivable. It was positively profane! It was almost as if one
should presume to address the Deity as “old chap.” I could hardly
believe my ears.

I glanced at her nervously and caught her glittering eye; but the
grotesque face was as immovable as everlasting granite, though,
indeed, by some ventriloquial magic, the word “Rubbish” managed to
disengage itself from her person.

“It isn’t rubbish,” retorted Sylvia. “It’s the plain truth. We were
both worried to death about you. And no wonder. Dr. Thorndyke was very
quiet and matter-of-fact, but there was no disguising his fear that
something dreadful had happened to you. And then there was the
advertisement in the papers. Did you see that? Oh, it’s nothing to
grin about. You’ve given us all a nice fright; and me especially,
because, of course, I naturally thought of that ruffian from whom you
rescued me in the lane.”

“But he never saw me.”

“You don’t know. He may have done. At any rate, you owe us an
explanation; so, when the tea comes in you shall give us the true
story of your adventures. I hope you’ve let Dr. Thorndyke know about
your resurrection.”

I reassured her on this point, and as the “goose of a maid” now
brought in the tea, I proceeded to “pitch my yarn” as the skipper had
expressed it, without those reservations that I had considered
necessary in the case of Mrs. Blunt.

The old lady, having been unmasked by Sylvia, developed a slight
tendency to thaw. She even condescended, in a rigid and effigean
fashion, to consume bread and butter; a proceeding that seemed to me
weirdly incongruous, as though one should steal into the British
Museum in off hours and find the seated statue of Amenhotep the Third
in the act of refreshing itself with a sandwich and a glass of beer.
But I was less terrified of her now since I had gathered that a core
of warm humanity was somewhere concealed within that grim exterior;
and even though her little sparkling eyes were fixed on me immovably,
I told my story to the end without flinching.

Sylvia listened to my narration with a rapt attention that greatly
flattered my vanity and made me feel like a very Othello, and when I
had finished, she regarded me for awhile silently and with an air of
speculation.

“It’s a queer affair,” she said at length, “and there is a smack of
mystery and romance about it that is rather refreshing in these
commonplace days. But I don’t like it. Adventure is all very well, but
there seems to have been a deliberate attempt to make away with you;
unless you think it may have been a piece of silly horse-play that
went farther than it was meant to.”

“That is quite possible,” I replied untruthfully--for I didn’t think
anything of the sort, and only made this evasive answer to avoid
raising other and more delicate issues.

“I hope that is the explanation,” said Sylvia, “though it sounds
rather a lame one. You would know if you had an enemy who might wish
to get rid of you. I suppose you don’t know of any such person?”

It was a rather awkward question. I didn’t want to tell an untruth,
but, on the other hand, I knew that Thorndyke would not wish to have
my affairs discussed while his investigations were in progress; so I
“hedged” once more, replying, quite truthfully, that I was not
acquainted with anyone who bore me the slightest ill-will.

My adventures done with, the talk drifted into other channels and
presently came round to the little crucifix that had been the occasion
of Sylvia’s disagreeable experience in the lane. In spite of my
confusion, I had noticed, on first entering the room, that the old
lady was wearing suspended from her neck, a small enamelled crucifix,
and had instantly identified it and wondered not a little that she
should be thus disporting herself in borrowed ornaments; but when
Sylvia had arrived, behold, the original crucifix was hanging on its
chain from _her_ neck. From time to time during my recital my eyes had
wandered from one to the other seeking some difference or variation
but finding none, and at length my inquisitive glances caught the
younger lady’s attention.

“I can see, Dr. Jardine,” said she, “that you are eaten up with
curiosity about the crucifix that my Aunt is wearing. Now confess.
Aren’t you?”

“I am,” I admitted. “When I first came in I naturally thought it was
yours. Is it a copy?”

“Certainly not,” said Miss Vyne, the elder. “They are duplicates.”

Sylvia laughed. “You’d better not talk about copies,” said she. “My
aunt has only acquired her treasure lately, and she is as proud of it
as a peacock; aren’t you, dear?”

“The sensations of a peacock,” replied Miss Vyne, “are unknown to me.
I am very gratified at possessing the ornament.”

“Gratified indeed!” said Sylvia. “I consider such vanity most
unsuitable to a person of your age. But they _are_ very charming, and
there is quite a little story attached to them. My father and a cousin
of his--”

“By marriage,” interposed Miss Vyne.

“You needn’t insist on that,” said Sylvia, “as if poor old Vitalis
were a person to be ashamed of. Well, my father and this cousin were
at a Jesuit school in Belgium--at Louvain, in fact--and among the
teachers in the school was an Italian Jesuit named Giglioli. Now the
respected Giggley--”

“--oli,” interposed Miss Vyne in a severe voice.

“--oli,” continued Sylvia, “had formerly been a goldsmith; and the
Father Superior, with that keen eye to the main chance which you may
have noticed among professed religious, furnished him with a little
workshop and employed him in making monstrances, thuribles and church
plate in general. It was he who made these two crucifixes; and, with
the Father Superior’s consent, he gave one to my father and the other
to the cousin as parting gifts on their leaving school. As the boys
were inseparable friends, the two crucifixes were made absolute
duplicates of one another, with the single exception that each had the
owner’s name engraved on the back. When my poor father died his
crucifix became mine, and a short time ago, his cousin--who is now
getting an old man--took a fancy that he would like the two crucifixes
to be together once more and gave his to my aunt. So here they are,
after all these years, under one roof again.”

As she finished speaking, she detached the crucifix from her neck and,
having given it to me to examine, proceeded to remove its fellow from
the neck of the elder lady--who not only submitted quite passively but
seemed to be unaware of the transaction--and handed that to me also.

I laid them side by side in my palm and compared them, but could not
detect the slightest difference between them. They were complete
duplicates. Each was a Latin cross with trefoiled extremities, wrought
from a single piece of gold and enriched with champlevé enamel. The
body of the cross was filled with a ground of deep, translucent blue,
from which the figure stood out in rather low relief, and the space
between each of the trefoils was occupied by a single Greek
letter--Iota and Chi at the top and bottom respectively, and at the
ends of the horizontal arm Alpha and Omega. On turning them over, I
saw that the back of each bore an engraved inscription carried across
the horizontal arm, that on Sylvia’s reading: “A.M. Robertus, D.G.,”
while that on the other read: “A.M. Vitalis, D.G.”

“They are very charming little things,” I said, as I returned them to
Sylvia; “and it was a pretty idea of the old Jesuit to make them both
alike for the two friends. I suppose he didn’t make any more of them
for his other pupils?”

“What makes you ask that?” demanded Sylvia.

“I am thinking of that man in the lane. He must have had some reason
for claiming the crucifix as his, one would think; and as these are
quite unlike any ordinary commercial jewellery, the suggestion is that
the worthy Giglioli was tempted to repeat his successes. What do you
think?”

“I think,” said Miss Vyne, “that the suggestion is inadmissable.
Father Giglioli was an artist, and an artist does not repeat himself.”

“I am inclined to agree with my aunt,” said Sylvia. “An artist does
not care to repeat a design, excepting for a definite purpose, as in
the case of these duplicates; especially when the thing designed is
intended as a gift.”

To this I gave a somewhat qualified assent, though I found the
argument far from convincing; and, as I had made a very long
visitation, especially for a first call, I now rose to depart.

“I hope I may be allowed to come and see you again,” I ventured to say
as Miss Vyne raised a sort of semaphore arm to my extended hand.

“I see no reason why you should not,” she replied judicially. “You
seem to be a well-disposed young man, though indiscreet.
Good-afternoon.”

I bowed deferentially and then, to my gratification, was escorted as
far as the garden gate by Sylvia; who evidently wished to gather my
impressions of her relative, for, as she let me out, she asked with a
mischievous smile:

“What do you think of my aunt, Dr. Jardine?”

“She is rather a terrifying old lady,” I replied.

Sylvia giggled delightedly. “She does look an awful old griffin,
doesn’t she? But it’s all nonsense, you know. She is really a dear old
thing, and as soft as butter.”

“Well,” I said, “she conceals the fact most perfectly.”

“She does. She is a most complete impostor. I’ll tell you a secret,
Dr. Jardine,” Sylvia added in a mysterious whisper, as we shook hands
over the gate; “she trades on her nose. I’ve told her so. Her nose is
her fortune, and she plays it for all it’s worth. Good-bye--or rather,
au revoir! for you’ve promised to come and see us again.”

With a bright little nod she turned and ran up the garden path, still
chuckling softly at her joke; and I wended homewards, very well
pleased with the circumstances of my visit, despite the soul-shaking
incidents with which it had opened.




 CHAPTER XIII.
 A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER

On the following morning I betook myself to the hospital intending
to call later in the day at Dr. Thorndyke’s chambers; but that visit
turned out to be unnecessary, for, as I ran my eye over the names on
the attendance board in the entrance hall, I saw that Thorndyke was in
the building, although it was not the day on which he lectured. I
found him, as I had expected, in the museum and was greeted with a
hearty grip of the hand and a welcome, the warmth of which gratified
me exceedingly.

“Well, Jardine,” he said, “you’ve given us all a pretty fine shake-up.
I have never been more relieved in my life than I was when my man
Polton gave me your note. But you seem to have had another fairly
close shave. What a fellow you are, to be sure! You seem to be as
tenacious of life as the proverbial cat.”

“So that little archbishop is your man Polton, is he?”

“Yes; and a most remarkable man, Jardine, and simply invaluable to me,
though he ought to be in a very different position. But I think he is
quite happy with me--especially now that he has got your watch to
experiment on. You will see that watch again some day, when he has
rated it to half a second. And meanwhile let us go into the curator’s
room and re-constitute your adventures.”

The curator’s room was empty at the moment; empty, that is to say, so
far as human denizens were concerned. Otherwise it was decidedly full;
the usual wilderness of glass jars, sepulchral slate tanks, bones in
all stages of preparation and unfinished specimens, being supplemented
by that all-pervading, unforgettable odour peculiar to curator’s
rooms, compounded of alcohol and mortality, and suggesting a
necropolis for deceased dipsomaniacs. Thorndyke seated himself on a
well-polished stool by the work-bench, and, motioning me to another,
bade me speak on. Which I did in exhaustive detail; giving him a
minute history of my experiences from the time of my parting from
Sylvia to the present moment, not omitting my encounter with Mrs.
Samway and the clerical gentleman in the train.

He listened to my narrative in his usual silent, attentive fashion,
making no comments and asking no questions until I had finished; when
he cross-examined me on one or two points of detail.

“With regard to Mrs. Samway,” he asked; “did you gather that she was
crossing by the Boulogne boat?”

“I inferred that she was, but she said nothing on the subject.”

He nodded and then asked: “Do I understand that you never saw your
assailant at all?”

“I never got the slightest glimpse of him; in fact I could not say
whether the person who attacked me was a man or a woman excepting that
the obvious strength and the method of attack suggest a man.”

To this he made no reply, but sat awhile absorbed in thought. It was
evident that he was deeply interested in the affair, not only on my
account but by reason of the curious problems that it offered for
solution. Indeed, his next remark was to this effect.

“It is a most singular case, Jardine,” he said. “So much of it is
perfectly clear, and yet so much more is unfathomable mystery. But
just now, the speculative interest is overshadowed by the personal. I
am rather doubtful as to what we ought to do. It almost looks as if
you ought not to be at large.”

“I hope, sir, you don’t suggest shutting me up,” I exclaimed with a
grin.

“That was in my mind,” he answered. “You are evidently in considerable
danger, and you are not as cautious as you ought to be.”

“I shall be mighty cautious after this experience,” I rejoined; “and
you have yourself implied that I have nine lives.”

“Even so,” he retorted, “you have played away a third of them pretty
rapidly. If you are not more careful of the other six, I shall have to
put you somewhere out of harm’s way. Do, for goodness’ sake, Jardine,
keep away from unpopulated places and see that no stranger gets near
enough to have you at a disadvantage.”

I promised him to keep a constant watch for suspicious strangers and
to avoid all solitary neighbourhoods and ill-lighted thoroughfares,
and shortly after this we separated to go our respective ways, he back
to the museum and I to the surgical wards.

For some time after this, the record of my daily life furnishes
nothing but a chronicle of small beer. I had resumed pretty regular
attendance at the hospital, setting forth from my lodgings in the
morning and returning thither as the late afternoon merged into
evening; taking the necessary exercise in the form of the long walk to
and from the hospital, and keeping close indoors at night. It began to
look as though my adventures were at an end and life were settling
down to the old familiar jog trot.

And yet the beer was not quite so small as it looked. Coming events
cast their shadows before them, but often enough those shadows wear a
shape ill-defined and vague, and so creep on unnoticed. Thus it was in
these days of apparent inaction, though even then there were certain
little happenings at which I looked askance. Such an episode occurred
within a few days of my return, and gave me considerable food for
thought. I had climbed on to the yellow ’bus in the Tottenham Court
Road and was seated on the top, smoking my pipe, when, as we passed up
the Hampstead Road, I noticed a woman looking into the window of Mr.
Robinson, the artist’s-colourman. Something familiar or distinctive in
the pose of the figure made me glance a second time; and then I think
my eyes must have grown more and more round with astonishment as the
’bus gradually drew me out of range. For the woman was undoubtedly
Mrs. Samway.

It was really a most surprising affair. This good lady seemed to be
ubiquitous; to fly hither and thither and drop from the clouds as if
she were the possessor of a magic carpet. Apparently she had not gone
to Boulogne after all; or if she had, her stay on the Continent must
have been uncommonly short. But if she had not crossed on the boat,
what was she doing in Folkestone? It was all very well to say that she
had as much right to be in Folkestone as I had. That was true enough,
but it was a lame conclusion and no explanation at all.

It was my custom, as I have said, to walk from my lodgings to the
hospital, a distance of some five miles; but this was practicable only
in fine weather. On wet days I took the tram from the “Duke of St.
Alban’s”; and beguiled the slow journey by reading one of my
text-books and observing the manners and customs of my
fellow-passengers. Such a day was the one that followed the
re-appearance of Mrs. Samway. A persistent drizzle put my morning walk
out of the question and sent me reluctant but resigned to seek the
shelter of the tram, where having settled myself with a volume of
Gould’s “Surgical Diagnosis,” I began to read to the accompaniment of
the monotonous rhythm of the horses’ hoofs and the sleepy jingle of
their bells. From time to time I looked up from my book to take a
glance at the other occupants of the steamy interior, and on each
occasion that I did so, I caught the eye of my opposite neighbour
roving over my person as if taking an inventory of my apparel.
Whenever he caught my eye, he immediately looked away; but the next
time I glanced up I was sure to find him once more engaged in a
leisurely examination of me.

There was nothing remarkable in this. People who sit opposite in a
public vehicle unconsciously regard one another, as I was doing
myself; but when I had met my neighbour’s eye a dozen times or more, I
began to grow annoyed at his persistent inspection; and finally,
shutting up my book, proceeded to retaliate in kind.

This seemed to embarrass him considerably. Avoiding my steady gaze,
his eyes flitted to and fro, passing restlessly from one part of the
vehicle to another; and then it was that my medical eye noted a fact
that gave an intrinsic interest to the inspection. The man had what is
called a nystagmus; that is, a peculiar oscillatory movement of the
eyeball. As his eyes passed quickly from object to object, they did
not both come to rest instantaneously, but the right eye stopped with
a sort of vertical stagger as if the bearings were loose. The
condition is not a very common one, and the one-sided variety is
decidedly rare. It is usually associated with some defect of vision or
habitual strain of the eye-muscles, as in miners’ nystagmus; whence my
discovery naturally led to a further survey and speculation as to the
cause of the condition in the present case.

The man was obviously not a miner. His hands--with a cigarette stain,
as I noticed, on the left middle finger--were much too delicate, and
he had not in any way the appearance of a labourer. Then the spasm
must be due to some defect of eyesight. Yet he was not near-sighted,
for, as we passed a church at some distance, I saw him glance out
through the doorway at the clock and compare it with his watch; and
again, I noticed that he took out his watch with his left hand. Then
perhaps he had a blind eye or unequal vision in the two eyes; this
seemed the most likely explanation; and I had hardly proposed it to
myself when the chance was given to me to verify it. Confused by my
persistent examination of him, my unwilling patient suddenly produced
a newspaper from his pocket and, clapping a pair of pince-nez on his
nose, began to read. Those pince-nez gave me the required information,
for I could see that one glass was strongly convex while the other was
nearly plane.

The question of my friend’s eyesight being disposed of, I began to
debate the significance of that stain of the left middle finger. Was
he left-handed? It did not follow, though it seemed likely; and then I
found myself noting the manner in which he held his paper, until,
becoming suddenly conscious of the absurdity of the whole affair, I
impatiently picked up my book and reverted to the diagnosis of _renal
calculus_. I was becoming, I reflected disparagingly, as inquisitive
as Thorndyke himself; from whom I seemed to have caught some infection
that impelled me thus to concern myself with the trifling
peculiarities of total strangers.

The trivial incident would probably have faded from my recollection
but for another, equally trivial, which occurred a day or two later. I
was returning home by way of Tottenham Court Road and had nearly
reached the crossing at the north end when I suddenly remembered that
I had come to the last of my note-books. The shop at which I obtained
them was in Gower Street, hard by, and as the thought of the books
occurred to me, I turned abruptly and, running across the road, strode
quickly down a by-street that led to the shop.

As I came out into Gower Street I noticed a small, but rapidly
augmenting crowd on the pavement, and, elbowing my way through, found
at its centre a man lying on the ground, writhing in the convulsions
of an epileptic fit. I proceeded to ward off the well-meant attentions
of the usual excited bystanders, who were pulling open his hands and
trying to sit him up, and had thrust the corner of a folded newspaper
between his teeth to prevent him from biting his tongue when a
constable arrived on the scene; upon which, as the officer bore on his
sleeve the badge of the St. John’s Ambulance Society, I gave him a few
directions and began to back out of the crowd.

At this moment, I became aware of a pressure behind me and a
suspicious fumbling, strongly suggestive of the presence of a
pick-pocket. Instantly, I turned to the right about and directed a
searching look at the people behind me, and especially at a bearded,
nondescript person who seemed also to be backing out of the crowd. He
gave me a single, quick glance as I followed him through the press and
then averted his eyes; and as he did so, I noticed, with something of
a start, that his right eye came to rest with a peculiar, rapid
up-and-down shake. He had, in fact, a right-sided nystagmus.

The coincidence naturally struck me with some force. A nystagmus is
not, as I have said, a very common condition; one-sided nystagmus is
actually a rare one; and, of the one-sided instances, only some fifty
per cent. will affect the right eye. The coincidence was therefore
quite a notable one; but had it any particular bearing? I had a
half-formed inclination to follow the man; but he had not actually
picked my pocket or done any other overt act, and one could hardly
follow a person merely because he happened to suffer from an uncommon
nervous affection.

The man was now walking up the street, briskly, but without manifest
hurry; looking straight before him and swinging his stick with
something of a flourish. I watched him speculatively, as I walked in
the same direction, and then suddenly realized that he was carrying
his stick in his left hand, and carrying it, too, with the
unmistakable ease born of habit. Then he was left-handed! And here was
another coincidence; not a remarkable one in itself, but, when added
to the other, so singular and striking that I insensibly quickened my
pace.

As my acquaintance reached the corner of the Euston Road, an omnibus
stopped to put down a passenger. It was about to move on when he
raised his stick, and, following it, stepped on the footboard and
mounted to the roof. I was undecided what to do. Should I follow him?
And, if so, to what purpose? He would certainly notice me if I did and
be on his guard, so that I should probably have my trouble for nothing
and possibly look like a fool into the bargain. And while I was thus
standing irresolute at the corner, the omnibus rumbled away westward
and decided the question for me.

I am not, as the reader may have gathered, a particularly cautious man
or much given to suspicion. But recent events had made me a good deal
more wary and had taught me to look with less charity on chance fellow
creatures; and this left-handed person with the nystagmus occupied my
thoughts to no small extent during the next day or two. Was he the man
whom I had seen in the tram? Apparently not. The latter had been clean
shaven and dressed neatly in the style of a clerk or ordinary City
man, whereas the former wore a full beard and was shabby, almost
beyond the verge of respectability. As to their respective statures, I
could not judge, as I had seen the one man seated and the other
standing; but, superficially, they were not at all alike, and, in all
probability they were different persons.

But this conclusion was not at all inevitable. When I reflected on the
matter, I saw that the resemblances and differences did not balance.
The two men resembled one another in qualities that were inherent and
unalterable, but they differed in qualities that were superficial and
subject to change. A man cannot assume or cast off a nystagmus, but he
can put on a false beard. A left-handed man may endeavour to conceal
his peculiarity, but the superior deftness of the habitually used hand
will make itself apparent in spite of his efforts; whereas he can make
any alterations in his clothing that he pleases. And thus reflecting,
the suspicion grew more and more strong that the two men might very
well have been one and the same person, and that it would be discreet
to keep a bright look-out for a left-handed man with a right-sided
nystagmus.

During all this time I had seen nothing of my new friend Miss Sylvia.
But I had by no means forgotten her. Without wishing to exaggerate my
feelings, I may say that I had taken a strong liking to that very
engaging young lady. She was a pleasant, easy-mannered girl, evidently
good-tempered, and very frank and simple; a girl--as Mr. Sparkler
would have said--“with no bigod nonsense about her.” Her tastes ran
along very similar lines to my own, and she was clever enough to be a
quite interesting companion. Then it was evident that she liked
me--which was in itself an attraction, to say nothing of the credit
that it reflected on her taste--and, in a perfectly modest way, she
had made no secret of the fact. And finally, she was exceptionally
good-looking. Now people may say, as they do, that beauty is only skin
deep--which is perfectly untrue, by the way; but even so, one is more
concerned with the skins of one’s fellow creatures than with their
livers or vermiform appendices. The contact of persons, as of things,
occurs at their respective surfaces.

From which it will be gathered that I was only allowing a decent
interval to elapse before repeating my visit to “The Hawthorns”;
indeed, I was beginning to think that a sufficient interval had
already passed and to contemplate seriously my second call, when my
intentions were forestalled by Sylvia herself. Returning home one
Friday evening, I found on my mantelpiece a short letter from her,
enclosing a ticket for an exhibition of paintings and sculpture at a
gallery in Leicester Square, and mentioning--incidentally--that she
proposed to visit the show on the following morning in order to see
the works by a good light; which seemed such an eminently rational
proceeding in these short winter days, that I determined instantly to
follow her example and get the advantage of the morning light myself.

I acted on this decision with such thoroughness that, when I arrived
at the gallery, I found the attendant in the act of opening the doors,
and, for nearly half an hour I was in sole possession of the premises.
Then, by twos and threes, other visitors began to straggle in, and
among them Sylvia, looking very fresh and dainty and obviously pleased
to see me.

“I am glad you were able to come,” she said, as we shook hands. “I
thought you would, somehow. It is so much nicer to have someone to
talk over the pictures with, isn’t it?”

“Much more interesting,” I agreed. “I have been taking a preliminary
look round and have already accumulated quite a lot of profound
observations to discharge at you as occasion offers. Shall we begin at
number one?”

We began at number one and worked our way methodically picture by
picture, round the room, considering each work attentively with
earnest discussion and a wealth of comment. As the morning wore on,
visitors arrived in increasing numbers, until the two large rooms
began to be somewhat inconveniently crowded. We had made a complete
circuit of the pictures and were about to turn to the sculpture, which
occupied the central floor space, when Sylvia touched me on the arm.

“Let us sit down for a minute,” said she. “I want to speak to you.”

I led her to one of the large settees that disputed the floor-space
with the busts and statuettes, and, somewhat mystified by her serious
tone and by the rather agitated manner, which I now noticed for the
first time, seated myself by her side.

“What is it?” I asked.

She looked anxiously round the room, and, leaning towards me, said in
a low tone:

“Have you noticed a man who has been keeping near us and listening to
our conversation?”

“No, I haven’t,” I replied. “If I had I would have given him a hint to
keep farther off. But there’s nothing in it, you know. In picture
galleries it is very usual for people to hang about and try to
overhear criticisms. This man may be interested in the exhibits.”

“Yes, I know. But I don’t think this person was so much interested in
the exhibits. He didn’t look at the pictures, he looked at us. I
caught his eye several times reflected in the picture-glasses, and
once or twice I saw him looking most attentively at this crucifix of
mine. That was what really disturbed me. I wish, now, that I hadn’t
unbuttoned my coat.”

“So do I. You will have to leave that crucifix at home if it attracts
so much undesirable attention. Which is the man? Is he in this room?”

“No, I don’t see him now. I expect he has gone into the next room.”

“Then let us go there, too; and if you will point him out to me, I
will pay him back in his own coin.”

We rose and made our way to the door of communication, and, as we
passed into the second room, Sylvia grasped my arm nervously.

“There he is--don’t let him see us looking at him--he is sitting on
the settee at the farther end of the room.”

It was impossible to make a mistake since the settee held only a
single person; a fairly well-dressed, ordinary-looking man, rather
swarthy and foreign in appearance, with a small waxed moustache. He
was sitting nearly opposite the entrance door and seemed, at the
moment, to be reading over the catalogue, which he held open on his
knee; but, as he looked up almost at the moment when we entered, I
turned my back to him and continued my inspection with the aid of the
reflection in a picture-glass.

“He is probably a journalist,” I said. “You see he is scribbling some
notes on the blank leaves of his catalogue; probably some of your
profound criticisms, which will appear, perhaps to-morrow morning,
clothed in super-technical jargon, in a daily paper.”

Here I paused suddenly, for I had made a rather curious observation.
The reflection in a mirror is, as everybody knows, reversed laterally;
so that the right hand of a person appears to be the left, and vice
versa. But in the present case, no reversal seemed to have taken
place. The figure in the reflection was writing with his right hand.
Obviously, then, the real person was writing with his left.

This put a rather different aspect on the affair. Up to the present, I
had been disposed to think that Sylvia had been unduly disturbed; for
there are plenty of ill-bred bounders to be met in any public place
who will stare a good-looking girl out of countenance. But now my
suspicions were all awake. It is true that left-handed men are as
common as blackberries; but still--

“Can you tell me, Miss Vyne,” I asked, as we worked our way towards
the other end of the room, “if this man is at all like the one who
frightened you so in Millfield Lane?”

“No, he is not. I am sure of that. The man in the lane was a good deal
taller and thinner.”

“Well,” said I, “whoever he is, I want to have a good look at him, and
the best plan will be to turn our attention to the sculpture. Shall we
go and look at that rather remarkable pink bust? That will give our
friend a chance of another stare at you, and, if he doesn’t take it,
I will go and inspect him where he sits.”

The bust to which I had referred was executed in a curious rose-tinted
marble, very crystalline and translucent, a material that suited the
soft, girlish features of its subject admirably. It stood on an
isolated pedestal quite near the settee on which the suspicious
stranger was sitting, and I hoped that our presence might lure him
from his retreat.

“I don’t think,” I said, taking up a position with my back to the
settee, “that I have ever seen any marble quite like this. Have you?”

“No,” replied Sylvia. “It looks like coarse lump sugar stained pink.
And how very transparent it is; too transparent for most subjects.”

Here she gave a quick, nervous glance at me, and I was aware of a
shadow thrown by some person standing behind me. Had our friend risen
to the bait already? I continued the conversation in good audible
tones.

“Very awkward these isolated pedestals would be for slovenly artists
who scamp the back of their work.”

With this remark I moved round the pedestal as if to examine the back
of the bust, and Sylvia followed. The move brought us opposite the
person who had been standing behind me; and, sure enough, it was the
gentleman from the settee. I continued to talk--rather blatantly, I
fear--commenting on the careful treatment of the hair and the backs of
the ears; and meanwhile took an occasional swift glance at the man
opposite. He appeared to be gazing in wrapt admiration at the bust,
but his glance, too, occasionally wandered; and when it did, the
“point of fixation,” as the oculists would express it, was Sylvia’s
crucifix, which was still uncovered.

Presently I ventured to take a good, steady look at him and was for a
few moments unobserved. His left eye moved, as I could see, quite
smoothly and evenly from point to point; but the right, at each change
of position, gave a little, rapid, vertical oscillation. Suddenly he
became aware of my, now undisguised, inspection of him, and,
immediately, the oscillation became much more marked, as is often the
case with these spasmodic movements. Perhaps he was conscious of the
fact; at any rate, he turned his head away and then moved off to
examine a statuette that stood near the middle of the room.

I looked after him, wondering what I ought to do. That he was the man
whom I had seen on the two previous occasions I had not the slightest
doubt, although I was still unable to identify his features or
anything about him excepting the nystagmus and the left-handed
condition. But there could be no question that he was the same man;
and this very variability in his appearance only gave a more sinister
significance to the affair, pointing clearly, as it did, to careful
and efficient disguise. Evidently he had been, and still was,
shadowing me, and, what was still worse, he seemed to be taking a most
undesirable interest in Sylvia. And yet what could I do? My small
knowledge of the law suggested that shadowing was not a criminal act
unless some unlawful intent could be proved. As to punching the
fellow’s head--which was what I felt most inclined to do--that would
merely give rise to disagreeable, and perhaps dangerous, publicity.

“My lord is pleased to meditate,” Sylvia remarked at length, breaking
in upon my brown study.

“I beg your pardon,” I exclaimed. “The fact is I was wondering what we
had better do next. Do you want to see anything else?”

“I should rather like to see the outside of the building,” she
answered. “That man has made me quite nervous.”

“Then we will go at once, and we won’t sign the visitor’s book.”

I led her to the door, and, as we rapidly descended the carpeted
stairs, I considered once more what it were best to do. Had I been
alone I would have kept our watcher in view and done a little
shadowing on my own account; but Sylvia’s presence made me uneasy. It
was of the first importance that this sinister stranger should not
learn where she lived. The only reasonable course seemed to be to give
him the slip if possible.

“What did you make of that man?” Sylvia asked when we were outside in
the square. “Don’t you think he was watching us?”

“Yes, I do. And I may say that I have seen him before.”

She turned a terrified face to me and asked: “You don’t think he is
the wretch who pushed you into the river?”

Now this was exactly what I did think, but it was not worth while to
say so. Accordingly I temporized.

“It is impossible to say. I never saw that man, you know. But I have
reason for thinking that this fellow is keeping a watch on me, and it
occurs to me that, if he appears still to be following us, I had
better put you into a hansom and keep my eye on him until you are out
of sight.”

“Oh, I’m not going to agree to that,” she replied with great decision.
“I don’t suppose that my presence is much protection to you, but
still, you are safer while we are together, and I’m not going to leave
you.”

This settled the matter. Of course she was quite right. I was much
safer while she was with me, and if she refused to go off alone, we
must make our escape together. I looked up the square as we turned out
of it towards the Charing Cross Road, but could see no sign of our
follower, and, as we walked on at a good pace, I hoped that we might
get clear away. But I was not going to take any chances. Before
turning homewards, I decided to walk sharply some distance in an
easterly direction and then see if there was any sign of pursuit; for
my previous experiences of this good gentleman led me to suspect that
he was by no means without skill and experience in the shadowing art.

We walked down to Charing Cross and turned eastward along the north
side of the Strand. I had chosen this thoroughfare as offering a good
cover to a pursuer, who could easily keep out of sight among the crowd
of way-farers who thronged the pavement for the first question to be
settled was whether we were or were not being shadowed.

“Where are we going now?” Sylvia asked.

“We are going up Bedford Street,” I answered. “There is a book shop on
the right-hand side where we can loiter unobtrusively and keep a
look-out. If we see nobody, we will try one of the courts off Maiden
Lane where we should be certain to catch anyone who was following. But
we will try the bookstall first because, if our friend is in
attendance, I have a rather neat plan for getting rid of him.”

We accordingly made our way to the bookstall in Bedford Street and
began systematically to look through the second-hand volumes; and as
we pored over an open book, we were able to keep an effective watch on
the end of the street and the Strand beyond. Our vigil was not a long
one. We had been at the stall less than a minute when Sylvia whispered
to me:

“Do you see that man looking in the shop on the farther side of the
Strand?”

“Yes,” I replied, “I have noticed him. He has only just arrived, and I
fancy he is our man. If he is, he will probably go into the doorway so
as not to have to keep his back to us.”

Almost as I spoke, the man moved into the deep doorway as if to
inspect the end of the shop window, and Sylvia exclaimed:

“I’m sure that is the man. I can see his profile now.”

There could be no doubt of the man’s identity; and, at this moment, as
if to clinch the matter, he took out a cigarette and lighted it,
striking the match with his left hand.

“Come along,” said I. “We will now try my little plan for getting rid
of him. We mustn’t seem to hurry.”

We sauntered up to the corner of Maiden Lane and there stood for a few
moments looking about us. Then we strolled across to the farther side
of Chandos Street, and, as soon as we were out of sight of our
follower, crossed the road and slipped in at the entrance to the Civil
Service Stores. Passing quickly through the provision department, we
halted at the glazed doors, from which we could look out through the
Bedford Street entrance.

“There he is!” exclaimed Sylvia. And there he was, sure enough,
walking rather quickly up the east side of Bedford Street.

“Now,” said I, “let us make a bolt for it. This way.”

We darted out through the china, furniture and ironmongery
departments, across the whole width of the building and out of the
Agar Street entrance, where we immediately crossed into King William
Street, turned down Adelaide Street, shot through the alley by St.
Martin’s Church, and came out opposite the National Portrait Gallery
just as a yellow omnibus was about to start. We sprang into the moving
vehicle, and, as it rumbled away into the Charing Cross Road, we kept
a sharp watch on the end of King William Street. But there was no sign
of our pursuer. We had got rid of him for the present, at any rate.

“Don’t you think,” said Sylvia, “that he will suspect that we went
into the Stores?”

“I have no doubt he will, and that is where we have him. He can’t come
away and leave the building unsearched. Most probably he is, at this
very moment, racing madly up and down the stairs and trying to watch
the three entrances at the same time.”

Sylvia chuckled gleefully. “It has been quite good fun,” she said,
“but I am glad we have shaken him off. I think I shall stay indoors
for a day or two and paint, and I hope you’ll stay indoors, too. And
that reminds me that I am out of Heyl’s white. I must call in at
Robinson’s and get a pound tube. Do you mind? It won’t delay us more
than a few minutes.”

Now I would much rather have gone straight on to Hampstead, for our
unknown attendant certainly knew the whereabouts of my lodgings and
might follow us when he failed to find us in the stores. Moreover, I
had, of late, given the neighbourhood of the artist’s-colourman’s shop
a rather wide berth, having seen Mrs. Samway from afar once or twice,
thereabouts, and having surmised that she tended to haunt that
particular part of the Hampstead Road. But the fresh supply of flake
white seemed to be a necessity, so I made no objection, and we
accordingly alighted opposite the shop and entered. Nevertheless,
while Sylvia was making her purchase, I stood near the glass door and
kept a watchful eye on the street. When a tram stopped a short
distance away, I glanced quickly over its passengers, as well as I
could, though without observing anyone who might have been our absent
friend. But just as it was about to move on, I saw a woman run out
from the pavement and enter; and though I got but an indifferent view
of her, I felt an uncomfortable suspicion that the woman was Mrs.
Samway.

Looking back, I do not quite understand why I had avoided this woman
or why I now looked with distaste on the fact that she was travelling
in our direction. She was a pleasant-spoken, intelligent person, and I
had no dislike of her, nor any cause for dislike. Perhaps it was the
recollection of the offence that she had given Sylvia in this very
shop, but a short time since, that made me unwilling to encounter her
now in Sylvia’s company. At any rate, whatever the course may have
been, throughout the, otherwise, pleasant journey, and in spite of an
animated and interesting conversation, the thought of Mrs. Samway
continually recurred, and this notwithstanding that I kept a constant,
unobtrusive look-out for the mysterious spy who might, even now, be
hovering in our rear.

We alighted from the tram at the “Duke of St. Alban’s” and made our
way to North End by way of the Highgate Ponds. As we crossed the open
fields and the Heath, I turned at intervals to see if there was any
sign of our being followed; but no suspicious-looking person appeared
in sight, though on two separate occasions, I noticed a woman ahead of
us, and walking in much the same direction, turn round and look our
way. There was no reason, however, to suppose that she was looking at
us, and, in any case, she was too far ahead to be recognizable. At
last, somewhere in the neighbourhood of the Spaniard’s Road, she
finally disappeared, possibly into the hollow beyond, and I saw no
more of her.

At the gate of “The Hawthorns” I delivered up the heavy tube of paint,
and thus, as it were, formally brought our little outing to an end;
and as we shook hands Sylvia treated me to a parting exhortation.

“Now do take care of yourself and keep out of harm’s way,” she urged.
“You are so large, you see,” she added with a smile, “and such a very
conspicuous object that you ought to take special precautions. And you
must come and see us again quite soon. I assure you my aunt is
positively pining for another conversation with you. Why shouldn’t you
drop in to-morrow and have tea with us?”

Now this very idea had already occurred to me, so I hastened to close
with the invitation; and then, as she retired up the path with another
“good-bye” and a wave of the hand, I turned away and walked back
towards the Heath.

For some minutes I strode on, across furzy hollows or over little
hills, traversed by sunken, sandy paths, occupying myself with
thoughts of the pleasant, friendly girl whom I had just left and
reflections on the strange events of the morning. Presently I mounted
a larger hill, on which was perched a little, old-fashioned house.
Skirting the wooden fence that enclosed it, I turned the corner and
saw before me, at a distance of some forty yards, a rough, rustic
seat. On that seat a woman was sitting; and somehow, when I looked at
her and noted the graceful droop of the figure, it was without any
feeling of surprise--almost that of realized expectation--that I
recognized Mrs. Samway.




 CHAPTER XIV.
 A LONELY WOMAN

If I had had any intention of avoiding Mrs. Samway, that intention
must inevitably have been frustrated, for her recognition was as
instantaneous as my own. Almost as I turned the corner, she looked up
and saw me; and a few moments later, she rose and advanced in my
direction, so that, to an onlooker it would have appeared as if we had
met by appointment. There was obviously nothing for it but to look as
pleased as I could manage at such short notice; which I did, shaking
her hand with hypocritical warmth.

“And I suppose, Dr. Jardine,” said she, “you are thinking what a very
odd coincidence it is that we should happen to meet here?”

“Oh, I don’t know that it is so very odd. I live about here and I
understood you to say that you often come up to the Heath. At any
rate, our last meeting was a good deal more odd.”

“Yes, indeed. But the truth is that this is not a coincidence at all.
I may as well confess that I came here deliberately with the intention
of waylaying you.”

This very frank statement took me aback considerably; so much so that
I could think of no appropriate remark beyond mumbling something to
the effect that “it was very flattering of her.”

“I have been trying,” she continued, “to get a few words with you for
some time past; but, although I have lurked in your line of march in
the most shameless manner, I have always managed to miss you. I
thought, from what you told me, that you passed Robinson’s shop on
your way to the hospital.”

“So I do,” I replied mendaciously; for I could hardly tell her that I
had lately taken to shooting up by-streets with the express purpose of
avoiding that particular stretch of pavement.

“It’s rather curious that I never happened to meet you there. However,
I didn’t, so, to-day, I determined to take the bull by the horns and
catch you here.”

This last statement, like the former ones, gave me abundant matter for
reflection. How the deuce had she managed to “catch me here”? I
supposed that she had seen Sylvia and me in the Hampstead Road and had
guessed that we were coming on to this neighbourhood. That was a case
of feminine intuition; which, like the bone-setter’s skill, is a
wonderful thing--when it comes off (and when it doesn’t one isn’t
expected to notice the fact). Then she had gone on ahead--still
guessing at our final destination--and kept us in sight while keeping
out of view herself. It was not so very easy to understand and not at
all comfortable to think of, for there was a disagreeable suggestion
that she had somehow ascertained Sylvia’s place of abode beforehand.
And yet--well, the whole affair was rather mysterious.

“You don’t ask why it was that I wanted to waylay you,” she said, at
length, as I made no comment on her last statement.

“There is an old saying,” I replied, “that one shouldn’t look a
gift-horse in the mouth.”

“That is very diplomatic,” she retorted with a laugh. “But I daresay
your knowledge of women makes the question unnecessary.”

“My knowledge of women,” said I, “might be put into a nutshell and
still leave plenty of room for the nut and a good, fat maggot
besides.”

“Then I must beware of you. The man who professes to know nothing of
women is the most deep and dangerous class of person. But there is one
item of knowledge that you seem to have acquired. You seem to know
that women like to have pretty things said to them.”

“If you call that knowledge,” said I, “you must apply the same name to
the mere blind impulse that leads a spider to spin a nice, symmetrical
web.”

She laughed softly and looked up at me with an expression of amused
reflection. “I am thinking,” she said, “what a very fine symmetrical
web you would spin if you were a spider.”

“Possibly,” I replied. “But it looks as if the rôle of bluebottle
were the one that is being marked out for me.”

“Oh! Not a bluebottle, Dr. Jardine. It doesn’t suit you at all. If you
must make a comparison, why not say a Goliath beetle, and have
something really dignified--and not so very inappropriate?”

“Well, then, a Goliath beetle, if you prefer it; not that he would
look very dignified, kicking his heels in the elegant web of the
superlatively elegant feminine spider.”

“Oh, but that isn’t pretty of you at all, Dr. Jardine. In fact it is
quite horrid; and unfair, too; because you are trying to get the
information without asking a direct question.”

“What question am I supposed to ask?”

“You needn’t ask any. I will take pity on your masculine pride and
tell you why I have been lying in wait for you, although I daresay you
have guessed. The truth is, I am simply devoured by curiosity.”

“Concerning what?”

“Now, how can you ask? Just think! One day I meet you in the Hampstead
Road, going about your ordinary business, apparently a fixture, at
least for months. A few days later, a hundred miles from London, I
feel myself suddenly seized from behind; I turn round and there are
you with tragedy and adventure written large all over you.”

“I thought the tragedy was rather on your side; and so did the ancient
mariner with the black bottle and the tea cup. But--”

“I don’t wish to discuss the views of that well-meaning old brute. I
want an explanation. I want to know how you came to be in Folkestone
and in that extraordinary condition. I am sure something strange must
have happened to you.”

“Why? Haven’t I as much right to be in Folkestone as you have?”

“That is mere evasion. When I see a man who is usually rather
carefully and very neatly dressed, walking in the streets of a seaport
town without hat or a stick and with a collar that looks as if it had
been used to clean out a saucepan, and great stains on his clothes, I
am justified in inferring that something unusual has happened to him.”

“I didn’t think you had noticed my negligé get-up.”

“At the time I did not. I was very upset and agitated, I had just had
a lot of worry and was compelled to cross to France at a moment’s
notice; and then there was that horrible horse, and the sudden way
that you seized me and then got knocked down; and the--”

“The ancient mariner.”

“Yes, the ancient mariner; and the knowledge that I was behaving like
an idiot and couldn’t help it--though you were so nice and kind to me.
So you see, I was hardly conscious of what was happening at the time.
But afterwards, when I had recovered my wits a little, I recalled the
astonishing figure that you made, and I have been wondering ever since
what had happened to you. I assure you, Dr. Jardine, you looked as if
you might have swum to Folkestone.”

“Did I, by Jove!” I exclaimed with a laugh. “Well, appearances weren’t
so very deceptive. The fact is that I had swum part of the way.”

She looked at me incredulously. “Whatever do you mean?” she asked.

“I mean that you are now looking on a modern and strictly up-to-date
edition of Sinbad the Sailor.”

“That isn’t very explanatory. But I suppose it isn’t meant to be. It
is just a preliminary stimulant to whet my appetite for marvels, and a
most unnecessary one, I can assure you, for I am absolutely agape with
curiosity. Do go on. Tell me exactly what had happened to you.”

Now the truth is that I had already said rather more than was strictly
discreet and would gladly have drawn in my horns. But I had evidently
let myself in for some sort of plausible explanation, and a lack of
that enviable faculty that enables its possessor to tell a really
convincing and workmanlike lie, condemned me to a mere unimaginative
adherence to the bald facts, though I did make one slight and
amateurish effort at prevarication.

“You want a detailed log of Sinbad’s voyages, do you?” said I. “Then
you shall have it. We will begin at the beginning. The port of
departure was the Embankment somewhere near Cleopatra’s Needle. I was
leaning over the parapet, staring down at the water like a fool, when
some practical joker came along, and, apparently thinking it would be
rather funny to give me a fright, suddenly lifted me off my feet. But
my jocose friend hadn’t allowed for the top-heaviness of a person of
my height, and, before you could say ‘knife,’ I had slipped from his
hold and taken a most stylish header into the water. Fortunately for
me, a barge happened at the moment to be towing past, and, when I had
managed to haul myself on board, I fell into the arms of a marine
species of Good Samaritan, who, not having a supply of the orthodox
oil and wine, proceeded to fill me up with hot gin and water, which is
distinctly preferable for internal application. Then the Samaritan
aforesaid clothed me in gorgeous marine raiment and stowed me in a
cupboard to sleep off the oil and wine, which I did after some sixteen
hours, and then awoke to find our good ship on the broad bosom of the
ocean. And so--not to weary you with the incidents of the voyage--I
came to Folkestone, where I found a beautiful lady endeavouring, very
unsuccessfully, to hypnotize a run-away horse; and so to the adventure
of the tarred nets and the ancient mariner with the black bottle.”

Mrs. Samway smiled a little consciously as I mentioned the last
incidents, but the smile quickly faded and left a deeply thoughtful
expression on her face.

“You take it all very calmly,” said she, “but it seems to me to have
been a rather terrible experience. You really had a very narrow escape
from death.”

“Yes; quite near enough. I’m far from wanting any more from the same
tap.”

“And I don’t quite see why you assume that it was a mere clumsy joke
that sent you into the river by accident.”

“Why, what else could it have been?”

“It looks more like a deliberate attempt to drown you. Perhaps you
have some enemy who might want to make away with you.”

“I haven’t. There isn’t a soul in the world who owes me the slightest
grudge.”

“That seems rather a bold thing to say, but I suppose you know. Still,
I should think you ought to bear this strange affair in mind, and be a
little careful when you go out at night; to avoid the riverside, for
instance. Have you--did you give any information to the police about
this accident, as you call it?”

“Good Lord! No! What would have been the use?”

“I thought you might have given them some description of the man who
pushed you over.”

“But I never saw him. I don’t even know for certain that it was a man.
It might have been a woman for all that I can tell.”

Mrs. Samway looked up at me with that strangely penetrating expression
that I had seen before in those singular, pale eyes of hers.

“You don’t mean that?” she said. “You don’t really think that it could
have been a woman?”

“I don’t think very much about it; but as I never saw the person who
did me the honour of hoisting me overboard, I am clearly not in a
position to depose as to the sex of that person. But if it was a
woman, she must have been an uncommonly strong one.”

Mrs. Samway continued to look at me questioningly.

“I thought you seemed to hint at a suspicion that it actually was a
woman. You would surely be able to tell.”

“I suppose I should if there were time to think about the matter; but,
you see, before I was fairly aware that anyone had hold of me, I was
sticking my head into the mud at the bottom of the river, which is a
process that does not tend very much to clarify one’s thoughts.”

“No, I suppose not,” she agreed. “But it is a most mysterious and
dreadful affair. I can’t think how you can take it so calmly. You
don’t seem to be in the least concerned by the fact that you have been
within a hairs-breadth of being murdered. What do your friends think
about it?”

“Well, you see, Mrs. Samway,” I replied evasively, “one doesn’t talk
much about incidents of this kind. It doesn’t sound very credible, and
one doesn’t want to gain a reputation as a sort of modern Munchausen.
I shouldn’t have told you but that you were already partly in the
secret and that you cross-examined me in such a determined fashion.”

“But,” she exclaimed, “do you mean to tell me that you have said
nothing to anyone about this extraordinary adventure of yours?”

“No, I don’t say that. Of course, I had to give some sort of
explanation to my landlady, for instance, but I didn’t tell her all
that I have told you; and I would rather, if you don’t mind, that you
didn’t mention the affair to anyone. I should hate to be suspected of
romancing.”

“You shan’t be through anything that I may say,” she replied, “though
I should hardly think that anyone who knew you would be likely to
suspect you of inventing imaginary adventures.”

For some minutes after this we walked on without speaking, and, from
time to time, I stole a glance at my companion. And, once again, I
found myself impressed by something distinctive and unusual in her
appearance. Her unquestionable beauty was not like that of most pretty
women, localized and unequal, having features of striking
attractiveness set in an indifferent or even defective matrix. It was
diffused and all pervading, the product of sheer physical excellence.
With most women one feels that the more attractive wares are
judiciously pushed to the front of the window while a discreet
reticence is maintained respecting the unpresentable residue. Not so
with Mrs. Samway. Her small, shapely head, her symmetrical face, her
fine supple figure, and her easy movements, all spoke of a splendid
physique. She was not merely a pretty woman, she was that infinitely
rarer creature, a physically perfect human being; comely with the
comeliness of faultless proportion, graceful with the grace of
symmetry and strength.

Suddenly she looked up at me with just a hint of shyness and a little
heightening of the colour in her cheek.

“Are you going to tell me again, Dr. Jardine, that a cat may look at a
king? Or was it that a king may look at a cat?”

“Whichever you please,” I replied. “We will put them on a footing of
equality, excepting that the king might have the better claim if the
cat happened to be an exceptionally good-looking cat. But I wasn’t
really staring at you this time, I was only giving you a sort of
friendly look over. You weren’t quite yourself, I think, when we met
last.”

“No, I certainly was not. So you are now making an inspection. May I
ask if I am to be informed of the diagnosis, as I think you call it?”

Now, to tell the truth, I had thought her looking rather haggard and
worn and decidedly thinner; and when her sprightliness subsided in the
intervals of our somewhat flippant talk, it had seemed to me that her
face took on an expression that was weary and even sad. But it would
hardly do to say as much.

“It is quite irregular,” I replied. “The diagnosis is for the doctor;
the patient is only concerned with the treatment. But I’ll make an
exception in your case, especially as my report is quite
unsensational. I thought you looked as if you had been doing rather
too much and not greatly enjoying the occupation. Am I right?”

“Yes. Quite right. I’ve had a lot of worry and bother lately, and not
enough rest and peace.”

“I hope all that is at an end now?”

“I don’t know that it is,” she replied, wearily, “or, for that matter,
that it will ever be. Fate or destiny, or whatever we may call it,
starts us upon a certain road, and along that road we must needs
trudge, wherever it may lead.”

I was rather startled at the sudden despondency of her tone.
Apparently the road that Mrs. Samway trod was not strewn with roses.

“Still,” I said, “it is a long road that has no turning.”

“It is,” she agreed, bitterly, “but many have to travel such a road,
to find the turning at last barred by the churchyard gate.”

“Oh, come!” I protested, “we don’t talk of churchyards at your time of
life. We think of the jolly wayside inns and the buttercups and
daisies and the may-blossom in the hedgerows. Churchyard indeed! We
will leave that to the old folk and the village donkey, if you
please.”

She smiled rather wanly. Her gaiety seemed to have deserted her for
good.

“The wayside inns and the wayside flowers,” said she, “are your
portion--at least, I hope so. They are not for me. And, after all,
there are worse things to think of than a nice quiet churchyard, with
the village donkey browsing among the graves, as you say.”

“I quite agree with you. From the standpoint of the disinterested
spectator, not contemplating freehold investments, nothing can be more
delightfully rustic and peaceful. It is the personal application that
I object to.”

Again she smiled, but very pensively, and for a while we walked on in
silence. Presently she resumed. “I used to think that the shortness of
life was quite a tragedy. That was when I was young. But now--”

“When you were young!” I interrupted. “Why, what are you now? I can
tell you, Mrs. Samway, that there is many a girl of twenty who would
be only too delighted to exchange personalities with you, and who
would stand to make a mighty fine bargain if she could do it. If you
talk like this, I shall have to refer you to the great Leonardo’s
advice to painters.”

“What is that?” she asked.

“He recommends the frequent use of a looking-glass.”

She gave me a quick glance and then blushed so very deeply that I was
quite alarmed lest I should have given offence. But her next words
reassured me.

“It was nice of you to say that, and most kindly meant. I won’t say
that I don’t care very much how I look, because that would be an
ungracious return for your compliment and it wouldn’t be quite true.
There are times when one is quite glad to feel that one looks
presentable; the present moment, for instance.”

I acknowledged the compliment, with a bow.

“Thank you,” I said. “That was more than I deserved. I only wish that
your fortune was equal to your looks, but I am afraid it isn’t. I have
an uncomfortable feeling that you are not very happy.”

“I’m afraid I’m not,” she replied. “Life is rather a lottery, you
know, and the worst of it is that you can only take a single ticket.
So, when you find that you’ve drawn the wrong number and you realize
that there is no second chance--well, it isn’t very inspiriting, is
it?”

I had to admit that it was not; and, after a short pause, she
continued:

“Women are poor dependent creatures, Dr. Jardine; dependent, I mean,
for their happiness on the people who surround them.”

“But that is true of us all.”

“Not quite. A man--like yourself, for instance--has his work and his
ambitions that make him independent of others. But, for a woman,
whatever pretences she may make as to larger interests in life, a
husband, a home and one or two nice children form the real goal of her
ambition.”

“But you are not a lone spinster, Mrs. Samway,” I reminded her.

“No, I am not. But I have no children, no proper home, and not a real
friend in the world--unless I may think of you as one.”

“I hope you always will,” I exclaimed impulsively; for there was, to
me, something very pathetic in the evident loneliness of this woman.
She must, I felt, be friendless indeed if she must needs appeal for
friendship to a comparative stranger like myself.

“I am glad to hear you say that,” she replied, “for I am making you
bear a friend’s burden. I hope you will forgive me for pouring out my
complaints to you in this way.”

“It isn’t difficult,” said I, “to bear other people’s troubles with
fortitude. But if sympathy is any good, believe me, Mrs. Samway, when
I tell you that I am really deeply grieved to think that you are
getting so much less out of life than you ought. I only wish that I
could do something more than sympathize.”

“I believe you do,” she said. “I felt, at Folkestone, how kind you
were--as a good man is to a woman in her moments of weakness. That is
why, I suppose, I was impelled to talk to you like this. And that is
why,” she added, after a little pause, “I felt a pang of envy when I
saw you pass with your pretty companion.”

I started somewhat at this. Where the deuce could she have seen us
near enough to tell whether my companion was pretty or not? I turned
the matter over rapidly in my mind, and meanwhile, I said:

“I don’t quite see why you envied me, Mrs. Samway.”

“I didn’t say that I envied _you_,” she replied, with a faint smile
and the suspicion of a blush.

“Or her either,” I retorted. “We are only the merest acquaintances.”

My conscience smote me somewhat as I made this outrageous statement,
but Mrs. Samway took me up instantly.

“Then you’ve only known her quite a short time?”

The rapidity with which she had jumped to this conclusion fairly took
my breath away, and I had answered her question before I was aware of
it.

“But,” I added, “I don’t quite see how you arrived at your
conclusion.”

“I thought,” she replied, “that you seemed to like one another very
well.”

“So we do, I think. But can’t acquaintances like one another?”

“Oh, certainly; but if they are a young man and a maiden they are not
likely to remain mere acquaintances very long. That was how I argued.”

“I see. Very acute of you. By the way, where did you see us? I didn’t
see you.”

“Of course you didn’t. Yet you passed quite close to me on the
Spaniard’s Road, immersed in conversation, and little suspecting that
the green eyes of envy were fixed on you.”

“Oh, now, Mrs. Samway, I can’t have that. They’re not green, you know,
although what their exact colour is I shouldn’t like to say offhand.”

“What! Not after that careful inspection?”

“That didn’t include the eyes. Perhaps you wouldn’t mind if I made
another, just to satisfy my curiosity and settle the question for
good.”

“Oh, do, by all means, if it is such a weighty question.”

We both halted and I stared into the clear depths of her singular,
pale hazel eyes with an impertinent affectation of profound scrutiny,
while she looked up smilingly into mine. Suddenly, to my utter
confusion, her eyes filled and she turned away her head.

“Oh! please forgive me!” she exclaimed. “I beg your pardon--I do beg
your pardon most earnestly for being such a wretched bundle of
emotions. You would forgive me if you knew--what I can’t tell you.”

“There is no need, dear Mrs. Samway,” I said very gently, laying my
hand on her arm. “Are we not friends? And may I not give you my
warmest sympathy without asking too curiously what brings the tears to
your eyes?”

I was, in truth, deeply moved, as a young man is apt to be by a pretty
woman’s tears. But more than this, something whispered to me that my
playful impertinence had suddenly brought home to her the void that
was in her life; the lack of intimate affection at which she had
seemed to hint. And, instantly, all that was masculine in me had risen
up with the immemorial instinct of the male in defence of the female;
for, whatever her faults may have been, Mrs. Samway was feminine to
the finger-tips.

She pressed my hand for a moment and impatiently brushed the tears
from her eyes.

“I do hope, Dr. Jardine,” she said, looking up at me with a smile,
“that your wife will be a good woman. You’ll be a dreadful victim if
she isn’t, with your quick sympathy and your endless patience with
feminine silliness. And now I won’t plague you any more with my
tantrums. I hope I am not bringing you a great deal out of your way.
You do live in this direction, don’t you?”

“Yes; and I have been assuming that my direction was yours, too. Is
that right? Are you going back to Hampstead Road?”

“Not at once. I’m going to make a call at Highgate first.”

“Then you’ll want to go up Highgate Rise or Swain’s Lane; and I will
walk up with you if you’ll let me.”

“I think my nearest way will be up the little path that leads out of
Swain’s Lane. You know it, I expect?”

“Yes. It is locally known as Love Lane: it leads to the crest of the
hill.”

“That is right. You shall see me to the top of it and then I’ll take
myself off and leave you in peace.”

We had by this time crossed Parliament Hill Fields and passed the end
of the Highgate Ponds. A few paces more brought us out at the top of
the Grove and a few more to the entrance of the rather steep and very
narrow lane. For some time Mrs. Samway walked by my side in silence,
and, by the reflective way in which she looked at the ground before
her, seemed to be wrapped in meditation, which I did not disturb. As
we entered the lane, however, she looked up at me thoughtfully and
said:

“I wonder what you think of me, Dr. Jardine.”

It was a fine opening for a compliment, but somehow, compliments
seemed out of place, after what had passed between us. I accordingly
evaded the question with another.

“What do you suppose I think of you?”

“I don’t know. I hardly know what I think of myself. You would be
quite justified in thinking me rather forward, to waylay you in this
deliberate fashion.”

“Well, I don’t. Your curiosity about that Folkestone affair seems most
natural and reasonable.”

“I’m glad you don’t think me forward,” she said; “but, as to my
curiosity, I am beginning to doubt whether it was that alone that
determined me of a sudden to come here and talk to you. I half suspect
that I was feeling a little more solitary than usual, and that some
instinct told me that you would be kind to me and say nice things and
pet me just a little--as you have done.”

I was deeply touched by her pathetic little confession; so deeply that
I could find nothing to say in return.

“You don’t think any the worse of me,” she continued, “for coming to
you and begging a little sympathy and friendship?”

As she spoke, she looked up very wistfully and earnestly in my face,
and rested her hand for a moment on my arm. I took it in mine and drew
her arm under my own as I replied:

“Of course I don’t. Only I think it a wonder and a shame that my poor
friendship and sympathy should be worth the consideration of a woman
like you.”

She pressed my arm slightly, and, after a little interval, said in a
low voice with just the suspicion of a tremor in it:

“You have been very kind to me, Dr. Jardine; more kind than you know.
I am very, very grateful to you for taking what was really an
intrusion so nicely.”

“It was not in the least an intrusion,” I protested; “and as to
gratitude, a good many men would be very delighted to earn it on the
same terms. You don’t seem to set much value on your own exceedingly
agreeable society.”

She smiled very prettily at this, and again we walked on for a while
up the slope without speaking. Once she turned her head as if
listening for some sound from behind us, but our feet were making so
much noise on the loose gravel, and the sound reverberated so much in
the narrow space between the wooden fences that I, at least, heard
nothing. Presently we turned a slight bend and came in sight of the
opening at the top of the hill, guarded by a couple of posts. Within a
few yards of the latter she halted, and withdrawing her hand from my
arm, turned round and faced me.

“We must say ‘Good-bye’ here,” said she. “I wonder if I shall ever see
you again.”

For a moment I felt a strong impulse to propose some future meeting at
a definite date, but, fortunately some glimmering of discretion--and
perhaps some thought of Sylvia--restrained me.

“Why shouldn’t you?” I asked.

“I don’t know. But mine is rather a vagabond existence, and I suppose
you will be travelling about soon. I hope we shall meet again; but if
we do not, I shall always think of you as my friend, and you will have
a kind thought for me sometimes, won’t you?”

“I shall indeed. I shall think of you very often and hope that your
life is brighter than it seems to be now.”

“Thank you,” she said earnestly; “and now ‘Good-bye!’”

She held out her hand, and, as I grasped it, she looked in my face
with the wistful, yearning expression that I had noticed before, and
which so touched me to the heart that, yielding to a sudden impulse, I
drew her to me and kissed her. Dim as was the light of the fading
winter’s day, I could see that she had, in an instant, turned scarlet.
But she was not angry; for, as she drew away from me, shyly and almost
reluctantly, she gave me one of her prettiest smiles and whispered
“Good-bye” again. Then she ran out between the posts, and, turning
once again--and still as red as a peony--waved me a last farewell.

I stood in the narrow entrance looking out after her with a strange
mixture of emotions; pity, wonder and admiration and a little doubt as
to my own part in the late transaction. For I had never before kissed
a married woman, and cooling judgment did not altogether approve the
new departure; for if Mr. Samway was not all that he might be, still
he was Mr. Samway and I wasn’t. Nevertheless, I stood and watched my
late companion with very warm interest until she faded into the dusk;
and even then I continued to stand by the posts, gazing out into the
waning twilight and cogitating on our rather strange interview.

Suddenly my ear caught a sound from behind me, down the lane; a sound
which, while it set my suspicion on the alert, brought a broad grin to
my face. It was what I suppose I must call a stealthy footstep, but
the stealthiness might have stood for the very type and essence of
futility, for, as I have said, the ground sloped pretty steeply and
was covered with loose pebbles, whereby every movement of the foot was
rendered as audible as a thunderclap. However, absurd as the situation
seemed--if the unseen person was really trying to approach by
stealth--it was necessary to be on my guard. Moreover, if this should
chance to be the person with the nystagmus, the present seemed to be
an excellent opportunity for coming to some sort of understanding with
him.

Accordingly I wheeled about and began to walk back down the lane.
Instantly, the steps--no longer stealthy--began to retire. I quickened
my pace; the unknown and invisible eavesdropper quickened his. Then I
broke into a run, and so did he, notwithstanding which, I think I
should have had him but for an untoward accident. The ground was not
only sloping, but, under the loose gravel, was as hard as stone.
Consequently, the foothold was none of the best, as I presently
discovered, for, as I raced down one of the steepest slopes, the
pebbles suddenly rolled away under my foot and I lost my balance. But
I did not fall instantly. Half recovering, I flew forward, clawing the
air, stamping, staggering, kicking up the gravel, and making the most
infernal hubbub and clatter, before I finally subsided into a sitting
posture on the pebbles. When I rose, the footsteps were no longer
audible, though the lower end of the lane was still some distance
away.

I resumed my progress at a more sedate pace and kept a sharp look-out
for a possible ambush, though the lane was too narrow, even in the
darkness that now pervaded it, to furnish much cover to an enemy. Some
distance down, I came to an opening in the fence, where one or two
boards had become loose, and was half disposed to squeeze through and
explore. But I did not, for, on reflection, it occurred to me that if
the man was not there it would be useless for me to go, while if he
should be hiding behind the fence it would be simply insane of me to
put my head through the hole.

When I emerged into the road at the bottom, I looked about vaguely,
but, of course there was no sign of the fugitive--nor, indeed, could I
have identified him if I had met him. I loitered about undecidedly for
a minute or two, and then, realizing the futility of keeping a watch
on the entrance of the lane for a man whom I could not recognize, and
becoming conscious of a ravenous desire for food I made my way down
the Grove in the direction of my lodgings.




 CHAPTER XV.
 EXIT DR. JARDINE

My second visit to “The Hawthorns,” to which I had looked forward
with some eagerness, had, after all, to be postponed indefinitely. I
say “had,” since, under the circumstances, it appeared to be so unsafe
that I could not fairly take the risk that it involved. I had made the
engagement thoughtlessly, and, in my preoccupation with Mrs. Samway,
had not realized the indiscretion to which I had committed myself
until I was brought back sharply to the actual conditions by the
incident in Love Lane which I have mentioned. But, after that, I saw
that it would be the wildest folly to show myself in the vicinity of
Sylvia’s house. Evidently the spy, after we had given him the slip so
neatly, had made direct for my lodgings and lurked in the
neighbourhood, and there it must have been that he had picked me up
again as I passed with Mrs. Samway. Of course it was possible that the
unseen person in the lane was not really shadowing me at all; but his
stealthy approach, his hasty retreat and his mysterious disappearance,
left me in very little doubt on the subject.

I was not very nervous about this enigmatical person on my own
account. In spite of my alarming experiences, I found it difficult to
take him as seriously as I should have done, and still felt a quite
unjustifiable confidence in my capability of taking care of myself.
But on Sylvia’s account I was exceedingly uneasy. The interest that
this man had shown in the unlucky little ornament that she wore,
associated itself in my mind most disagreeably with her mysterious and
terrifying adventure in Millfield Lane, and made me feel that it would
be sheer insanity for me to go from my house to hers and so possibly
give this unknown villain the clue to her whereabouts.

This conclusion, at which I had arrived over-night, was confirmed on
the following morning, for, having taken a brisk walk out in the
direction of Harrow, and having kept a very sharp look-out, I was
distinctly conscious of the fact that there always appeared to be a
man in sight. I never got near him and was not able to recognize him,
but at intervals throughout the morning he continually reappeared in
the distance, even on the comparatively solitary country roads and the
hedge-divided meadows.

It was excessively irritating. Yet what could I do? Even if I could
have identified him with the man who had apparently shadowed me
before, I really had nothing against him. And cogitating on the
matter, with no little annoyance, I determined to take counsel with
Thorndyke, and meanwhile to avoid the neighbourhood of “The
Hawthorns.”

After lunch, I wrote a letter to Sylvia, briefly explaining the state
of affairs, and, having given it to our maid to deliver, I took the
precaution to go out and saunter towards Kentish Town with the object
of engaging the spy’s attention and preventing him from following my
messenger to North End. The rest of the day I spent at home and
occupied my time in writing a long letter to Thorndyke in which I gave
a pretty detailed account of my recent experiences; which letter was
duly posted by Mrs. Blunt herself in time for the evening collection.

I had barely seated myself at the breakfast table on the following
morning when a telegram was brought to me. On opening it I found that
it was from Thorndyke, advising me that a letter had been dispatched
by hand and asking me to stay at home until I had received it; which I
did; and within an hour it arrived and was delivered into my own hands
by a messenger boy.

It was curt and rather peremptory in tone, desiring me to meet him at
one o’clock at Salter’s Club in a turning off St. James’s Street and
concluding with these somewhat remarkable instructions: “I want you to
wear an overcoat and hat of a distinctive and easily recognizable
character and to take every means that you can of being seen and, if
possible, followed to the club. You had better put a few necessaries
in a bag or suit-case and tell your landlady that you may not be home
to-night. Follow these instructions to the letter and bring this note
with you.”

At the latter part of these directions I was somewhat disposed to
boggle, remembering my worthy teacher’s threat to put me somewhere out
of harm’s way. But Thorndyke was a difficult man to disobey. Suave and
persuasive as his manners were, he had a certain final and compelling
way with him that silenced objections and produced a sort of
frictionless obedience without any sense of compulsion. Hence,
notwithstanding a slight tendency to bluster and tell myself that I
would see him hanged before I would submit to being mollycoddled like
an idiot, I found myself, presently, walking down the Grove in a buff
overcoat and a grey felt hat, carrying a green canvas suit-case in
which were packed the necessaries for a brief stay away from home, and
bearing in my pocket the incriminating letter.

I walked slowly as far as the Junction Road in order to give any
pursuer a fair opportunity to take up the chase and to make the
necessary observations on my tasteful turn-out. At the Junction I
waited for a tram and carefully abstained from staring about in a
manner which would have embarrassed any person who might wish
unobserved to share the conveyance with me; and from the terminus at
Euston Road I proceeded in leisurely fashion on foot, still resisting
the temptation to look about and see if I had picked up a companion by
the way.

Salter’s Club was domiciled in a typical West End house situated in a
quiet street of similar houses, graced at one end by a cabstand. I
timed my arrival with such accuracy that a neighbouring church-clock
struck one as I ascended the steps; and on my entering the hall, I was
met by an elderly man in a quiet livery who seemed to expect me, for,
when I mentioned Thorndyke’s name, he asked, “Dr. Jardine, sir?” and,
hardly waiting for my reply, showed me to the cloak-room.

“Dr. Thorndyke,” said he, “will be with you in a few minutes. When you
have washed, I will show you to the dining room where he wished you to
wait for him.”

I was just a little surprised at even this short delay, for Thorndyke
was the soul of punctuality. However, I had not to wait long. I had
been sitting less than three minutes at a small table laid for two in
the deep bay window, scanning the street through the wire-gauze
blinds, when he arrived.

“I needn’t apologize, I suppose, Jardine,” he said, shaking my hand
heartily. “You will have guessed why I have kept you waiting.”

“You flatter me, sir,” I replied with a slight grin. “I haven’t your
powers of instantaneous deduction.”

“You hardly needed them,” he retorted. “Of course I was watching your
approach and observing the corner by which you entered the street to
see who came after you.”

“Did anyone come after me?”

“Several persons. I examined them all very carefully with a prism
binocular that magnifies twelve times linear, and an assistant is now
at the same window--the one over this--following the fortunes of those
persons with the same excellent glass.”

“Did you spot anyone in particular as looking a likely person?”

“Yes. The second man who came after you seemed to be sauntering in a
rather unpurposive fashion and looking a little obtrusively
unconcerned. I noticed, too, that he was carrying an umbrella in his
left hand. But we needn’t concern ourselves. If anyone is shadowing
you we are certain to see him. He must expose himself to view from
time to time, for he can’t afford to lose sight of our doorway for
more than a few seconds, and there is practically no cover in this
street.”

“He might hide in a doorway,” I suggested.

“Oh, might he! These are all clubs in this street. He’d very soon have
the servants out wanting to know his business. No; he’ll have to keep
on the move and he’ll have to keep mostly in sight of this house. And
meanwhile we are going to take our lunch at our leisure and have a
little talk to while away the time.”

The lunch was on a scale that my youthful appetite approved strongly,
though the number of courses and irrelevant, time-consuming kickshaws
struck me as rather unusual. And I never saw a man eat so slowly and
delay a meal so much as Thorndyke did on that occasion. I believe that
it took him fully twenty minutes to consume a fried sole; and even
then he created a further delay by drawing my attention to the
skeleton on his plate as an illustration of inherited deformity
adjusted to special environmental conditions. But all the time,
whether eating or talking, I noticed that his eye continually
travelled up and down the stretch of street that was visible through
the wire blinds.

“You haven’t told me why you sent for me, sir,” I said, after waiting
patiently for him to open the subject.

“I dare say you have guessed,” he replied; “but we may as well thrash
the matter out now. You realize that you are running an enormous and
unnecessary risk by going abroad with this man at your heels?”

“Well, I don’t suppose he is following me about from sheer affection.”

“No. I thought it possible that he might be a plain-clothes policeman,
but I have ascertained that he is not. Who he is we don’t know, but we
have the strongest reasons for suspecting his intentions. There have
been three very determined attempts on your life. They were all made
with such remarkable caution and foresight that, though they failed,
practically no traces have been left. Those attempts imply a strong
motive, though to us, an unknown one; and that motive, presumably,
still exists. Your enemy may well be getting desperate, and may be
prepared to take greater risks to get rid of you; and if he is, the
chances are that he will succeed sooner or later. Murder isn’t very
difficult to a cool-headed man who means business.”

“Then what do you propose, sir?”

“I propose that you disappear from your ordinary surroundings and come
and stay, for a time, at my chambers in the Temple.”

This was no more than I had expected, but my jaw dropped considerably,
notwithstanding.

“It’s awfully good of you, sir,” I stammered--and so, to be sure, it
was--“but don’t you think it would be simpler to turn the tables on
this Johnnie and shadow him?”

“An excellent idea, Jardine, and one, I may say, that I am acting on
at this moment. But there isn’t so much in it as you seem to think.
Supposing we identify this man and even run him to earth? What then?
We have nothing against him. We know of no crime that has been
committed. We may suspect that the man whom you saw at Hampstead had
been murdered. But we can’t prove it. We can’t produce the body or
even prove that the man was dead. And we couldn’t connect this person
with the affair because nobody was known to be connected with it. I
should like to know who this man is, but I don’t want to put him on
his guard; and above all, I can’t agree to your going about as a sort
of live-bait to enable us to locate him. By the way, that man on the
opposite side of the street is the one whom I selected as being
probably your attendant. Apparently I was right, as this is the third
time he has passed. Do you recognize him?”

I looked attentively at the uncharacteristic figure on the farther
side of the street, but could find nothing familiar in his appearance.

“No,” I replied; “he doesn’t look to me like the same man. He is
dressed differently--but that’s nothing, as he has been dressed
differently on each occasion--and that torpedo beard and full
moustache are quite unlike, though there’s nothing in that either; but
the man looks different altogether--distinctly taller, for instance.”

Thorndyke chuckled. “Good,” said he. “Now look at his feet, as he
passes opposite. Did you ever see an instep set at that angle to the
sole? And does not your anatomical conscience cry out at a foot of
that thickness?”

“Yes, by Jove!” I exclaimed; “there’s room for a double row of
metatarsals. It is a fake of some kind, I suppose?”

“Cork ‘raisers’ inside high-heeled boots. Through the glasses I could
see that the boots gaped considerably at the instep, as they will when
there is a pad inside as well as a foot. But you notice, also, that
the man is dressed for height. He has a tall hat, a long coat, and his
shoulders are obviously raised by padding. I think there is very
little doubt that he is our man.”

“It must be a dull job,” I remarked, “hanging about by the hour to see
a man come out of a house.”

“Very,” Thorndyke agreed. “I am quite sorry for the worthy person,
especially as we are going to play him a rather shabby trick
presently.”

“What are we going to do?” I asked.

“We are going to let him in for one of the longest waits he has ever
had, I am afraid. Perhaps I had better give you the particulars of our
_modus operandi_. First, I shall send down to the stand for a hansom,
which will draw up opposite the club; and thereupon I have no doubt
our friend will hurry down to the cabstand to be in readiness. At any
rate, I shall let him get down to that end of the street before I do
anything more. Then I shall take the liberty of putting on your coat
and hat and go out to the cab with your suit-case in my hand; I shall
stand on the kerb long enough to let our friend get a good view of my
back, I shall get into the cab, give the driver the direction through
the trap to drive to the hospital, and pay the fare in advance.”

“Why in advance?” I asked.

“So that I shall not have to turn round and show my face when I get
out at the hospital entrance. I assume that your friend will follow me
in another hansom. Also that he will alight at the outer gates,
whereas I shall drive into the courtyard right up to the main
entrance, so that he will merely see your hat, coat and suit-case
disappear into the building. Then, as I say, he will be in for an
interminable vigil. I have a lecture to give this afternoon, and, when
I have finished, I shall come away in a black overcoat and tall hat
(which are at this moment hanging up in the curator’s room), leaving
your friend to wait for the reappearance of your coat, hat and
suit-case. I only hope he won’t wait too long.”

“Why?”

“Because he may wear out the patience of my assistant. I have a
plain-clothes man keeping a watch from the window above. If your
friend sets off in pursuit of your garments, as I anticipate, the
plain-clothes man will go straight to the hospital and take up his
post in the porter’s lodge, which, as you know, commands the whole
street outside the gates.”

“And what have I got to do?”

“First of all, you will put your tooth brush in your pocket--never
mind about your razor--and let me try on your hat, in case we have to
pad the lining. Then, when you have seen your friend start off in
pursuit and are sure the coast is clear, you will make straight for my
chambers and wait there for me.”

“And supposing the chappie doesn’t start off in pursuit? Supposing he
twigs the imposture?”

“Then the plain-clothes man will go out and threaten to arrest him for
loitering with intent to commit a felony. That would soon move him on
out of the neighbourhood, and the officer might accompany him some
distance and try to get his address. Meanwhile, you would be off to
King’s Bench Walk.”

“But wouldn’t it be simpler to run the Johnnie in, in any case? Then
we should know all about him.”

“No, it wouldn’t do. The police wouldn’t actually make an arrest
without an information; and, if they did proceed, they would want me
to appear. That wouldn’t suit me at all. Until we obtain some fresh
evidence, I don’t want this man to get any suspicion that the case is
being investigated. And now I think the time has come for a move. Let
us go to the cloak-room and see if your hat fits me sufficiently
well.”

It was not a good fit, being just a shade small; but, as it was a soft
felt, this was not a vital defect. The overcoat fitted well enough,
though a trifle long in the sleeves, and when Thorndyke was fully
arrayed in this borrowed plumage, his back view, so far as I could
judge, was indistinguishable from my own.

“If you will take out your toothbrush and hand me your suit-case,”
said he, “I will send for a hansom, and then we will watch the
progress of events from the dining-room window.”

I handed him the green canvas case and we returned to the dining-room
and there, when he had ordered the cab, we took up a position at the
window, screened from observation by the wire blinds.

“Our friend,” said Thorndyke, “was walking towards the right hand end
of the street when we saw him last. As the cabstand is at the left
hand end, we may hope to look upon his face once again.”

As he spoke, the air was rent by the shriek of the cab-whistle, and
the leading hansom began immediately to bear down on the club. It had
hardly come to rest at our door when a figure appeared from the
opposite direction, advancing at a brisk walk on our side of the road.
I recognized him instantly as the man to whom Thorndyke had directed
my attention, and watched him closely, as he approached, to see if I
could identify him with the man who had shadowed Sylvia and me at the
picture gallery; but, though he passed within a few yards of the
window, and I felt no doubt that he was the same man, I could trace no
definite resemblance. It is true, that while actually passing the
club, he averted his face somewhat; but I had a good view of him
within an easy distance, and the face that I then saw was certainly
not the face of the man at the gallery. The skilfulness of the
make-up--assuming it to be really a disguise--was incredible, and I
remarked on it to Thorndyke.

“Yes,” he agreed, “a really artistic make-up is apt to surprise the
uninitiated. And that reminds me that Polton has instructions to make
a few trifling alterations in your own appearance.”

I stared at him aghast. “You don’t mean to say,” I exclaimed, “that
you contemplate making me up?”

“We won’t discuss the question now,” he replied a little evasively.
“You talk it over with Polton. It is time for me to go now, as our
quarry has considerately acted up to our expectations. He little knows
what confusion of our plans he would have occasioned by simply staying
at the other end of the street.”

The spy had, in fact, now halted opposite the cabstand and was
apparently making some notes in a pocket-book, facing, meanwhile, in
our direction. With a few parting instructions to me, Thorndyke picked
up the suit-case and hurried out, and I saw him dart down the
steps--with his face turned somewhat to the right--and stand for a few
seconds at the edge of the pavement with his back to the cabstand, but
in full view, looking at his watch as if considering some appointment.
Suddenly he sprang into the cab and, pushing up the trap, gave the
driver his instructions and handed up the fare. At the same moment I
saw the unknown shadower hail a hansom, and, scrambling to the
footboard, give some brief directions to the driver. Then Thorndyke’s
cabman touched his horse with the whip, and away he went at a smart
trot; but hardly had the cab turned the first corner when the second
hansom rattled past the club in hot pursuit.

I was about to turn away from the window when a tall, well-dressed man
ran down the steps and immediately signalled to the cabstand with his
stick. Thinking it probable that this was the plain-clothes policeman,
I stopped to watch; and when I had seen him enter the cab and drive
off in the same direction as the other two, I decided that the show
was over and that it was time for me to take my departure; which I
did, after stuffing a couple of envelopes into the lining of
Thorndyke’s hat, to prevent it from slipping down towards my ears.

That my arrival at number 5a, King’s Bench Walk was not quite
unexpected I gathered not only from the fact that the “oak” stood wide
open, revealing the inner door, but from the instantaneous way in
which this latter opened in response to my knock; and something
gleeful and triumphant in Mr. Polton’s manner as he invited me to
enter, stirred my suspicions and aroused vague forebodings.

He helped me out of my--or rather Thorndyke’s--overcoat, and, having
taken the hat from me, peered inquiringly into its interior and fished
out the two envelopes, which he politely offered to me. Then, having
disposed of his employer’s property, he returned to confront me, and,
wrinkling his countenance into a most singular and highly corrugated
smile, he opened his mouth and spoke.

“So you have come, sir, the Doctor tells me, to take sanctuary for a
time with us from the malice of your enemies.”

“I don’t know about that,” I replied; “but there is a cockeyed
transformationist who seems to be dodging about after me, and Dr.
Thorndyke thinks I had better give him the go-by for the present.”

“And very proper, too, sir. Discretion is the better part of valour,
as the proverb says--though I really could never see that it is any
part at all. But no doubt our forefathers, who made the proverb, knew
best. Did the Doctor mention that he had given me certain instructions
about you?”

“He said that I was to talk over some question with you, but I didn’t
quite follow him. What were his instructions?”

Polton rubbed his hands, and his face became more crinkly than ever.
“The Doctor instructed me,” he replied, looking at me hungrily and
obviously making a mental inventory of my features, “to effect certain
slight alterations in your outward personality.”

“Oh, did he,” said I. “And what does he mean by that? Does he mean
that you are to make me up as an old woman or a nigger minstrel?”

“Not at all, sir,” replied Polton. “Neither of those characters would
be at all suitable. They would occasion remark, which it is our object
to avoid; and as to a negro minstrel, his presence in chambers would
undoubtedly be objected to by the benchers.”

“But,” I expostulated, “why any disguise at all, if I am to be boxed
up in these chambers? The chappie isn’t likely to come and look
through the keyhole.”

“He wouldn’t see anything if he did,” said Polton. “I fitted these
locks. But, you see, sir, many strangers come to these chambers, and
then, too, you might like to take a little exercise about the inn or
the gardens. That would probably be quite safe if you were
unrecognizable, but otherwise, I should think, inadmissible. And
really, sir,” he continued persuasively, “if you do a thing at all you
may as well do it thoroughly. The Doctor wishes you to disappear; then
disappear completely. Don’t do it by halves.”

I could not but admit to myself that this was reasonable advice.
Nevertheless, I grumbled a little sulkily. “It seems to me that Dr.
Thorndyke is making a lot of unnecessary fuss. It is absurd for an
able-bodied man to be sneaking into a hiding-place and disguising
himself like a runaway thief.”

“I can offer no opinion on that, sir,” said Polton; “but you’re wrong
about the Doctor. He is a cautious man but he is not nervous or fussy.
You would be wise to act as he thinks best, I am sure.”

“Very well,” I said; “I won’t be obstinate. When do you want to begin
on me?”

“I should like,” replied Polton, brightening up wonderfully at my
sudden submission, “to have you ready for inspection by the time that
the Doctor returns. If agreeable to you, sir, I would proceed
immediately.”

“Then in that case,” said I, “we had better adjourn to the green-room
forthwith.”

“If you please, sir,” replied Polton; and with this, having opened the
door and cautiously inspected the landing, he conducted me up the
stairs to the floor above, the rooms of which appeared to be fitted as
workshops and laboratories. In one of the former, which appeared to be
Polton’s own special den, I saw my watch hanging from a nail, with a
rating table pinned above it, and proceeded to claim it.

“I suppose, sir,” said Polton, reluctantly taking it from its nail and
surrendering it to me, “as you are going to reside on the premises and
I can keep it under observation, you may as well wear it. The present
rate is plus one point three seconds daily. And now I will trouble you
to sit down on this stool and take off your collar.”

I did as he bade me, and, meanwhile, he turned up his cuffs and stood
a little way off, surveying me as a sculptor might survey a bust on
which he was at work. Then he fetched a large cardboard box, the
contents of which I could not see, and fell to work.

His first proceeding was to oil my hair thoroughly, part it in the
middle and brush it smoothly down either side of my forehead. Next he
shaved off the outer third of each eyebrow, and, having applied some
sort of varnish or adhesive, he proceeded to build up, with a number
of short hairs, a continuation of the eyebrows at a higher level. The
result seemed to please him amazingly, for he stepped back and viewed
me with an exceedingly self-satisfied smirk.

“It is really surprising, sir,” said he, “how much expression there is
in the corner of an eyebrow. You look a completely different gentleman
already.”

“Then,” said I, “there’s no need to do any more. We can leave it at
this.”

“Oh, no, we can’t, sir,” Polton replied hastily, making a frantic dive
into the cardboard box. “Begging your pardon, sir, it is necessary to
attend to the lower part of the face, in case you should wish to wear
a hat, which would cover the hair and throw the eyebrows into shadow.”

Here he produced from the box an undeniable false beard of the torpedo
type and approached me, holding it out as if it were a poultice.

“You are not going to stick that beastly thing on my face!” I
exclaimed, gazing at it with profound disfavour.

“Now, sir,” protested Polton, “pray be patient. We will just try it
on, and the Doctor shall decide if it is necessary.”

With this he proceeded to affix the abomination to my jowl with the
aid of the same sticky varnish that he had used previously, and,
having attached a moustache to my upper lip, worked carefully round
the edges of both with a quantity of loose hair, which he stuck on the
skin with the adhesive liquid and afterwards trimmed off with
scissors. The process was just completed and he had stepped back once
more to admire his work when an electric bell rang softly in the
adjoining room.

“There’s the Doctor,” he remarked. “I’m glad we are ready for him.
Shall we go down and submit our work for his inspection?”

I assented readily, having some hopes that Thorndyke would veto the
beard, and we descended together to the sitting-room, where we found
that Jervis and his principal had arrived together. As to the former,
he greeted my entrance by staggering back several paces with an
expression of terror, and then seated himself on the edge of the table
and laughed with an air of enjoyment that was almost offensive;
particularly to Polton, who stood by my side, rubbing his hands and
smiling with devilish satisfaction.

“I assume,” Thorndyke said, gravely, “that this is our friend
Jardine.”

“It isn’t,” said Jervis. “It’s the shopwalker from Wallis’s. I
recognized him instantly.”

“Look here,” I said, with some heat, “it’s all very well for you to
make me up like Charley’s Aunt and then jeer at me, but what’s the use
of it? The fifth of November’s past.”

“My dear Jardine,” Thorndyke said, soothingly, “you are confusing your
sensations with your appearance. I daresay that make-up is rather
uncomfortable, but it is completely successful, and I must
congratulate Polton; for the highest aim of a disguise is the utterly
common-place, and I assure you that you are now a most
ordinary-looking person. Fetch the looking-glass from the office,
Polton, and let him see for himself.”

I gazed into the mirror which Polton held up to me with profound
surprise. There was nothing in the least grotesque or unusual in the
face that looked out at me, only it was the face of an utter stranger;
and, as Thorndyke had said, a perfectly common-place stranger, at whom
no one would look twice in the street. Grudgingly, I acknowledged the
fact, but still objected to the beard.

“Do you think it is really necessary, sir, in addition to the other
disfigurements?”

“Yes, I do,” replied Thorndyke. “It is only a temporary expedient,
because, in a fortnight, your own beard will have grown enough to
serve with a little artificial re-enforcement. And,” he continued, as
Polton retired with a gratified smile, “I am anxious that your
disappearance shall be complete. It is not only a question of your
safety--although that is very urgent and I feel myself responsible for
you, as we are not appealing to the police. There are other issues.
Assuming, as we do assume, that some crime has been committed, the
lapse of time must inevitably cause some of the consequences of that
crime to develop. If the man whose body you saw at Hampstead was
really murdered, he must presently be missed and enquired for. Then we
shall learn who he was and perhaps we may gather what was the motive
of the crime. Then, your secret enemy will be left unemployed and may
produce some fresh evidence--for he can’t wait indefinitely for your
reappearance. And finally, certain enquiries which I am making may set
us on the right track. And, if they do, you must remember, Jardine,
that you are probably the sole witness to certain important items of
evidence; so you must be preserved in safety as a matter of public
policy, apart from your own prejudices in favour of remaining alive.”

“I didn’t know that you were actually working at the case,” I said.
“Have you been following up that man Gill of the mineral water works?”

“I followed him up to the vanishing-point. He has gone and left no
trace; and I have been unable to get any description of him.”

“Then,” said I, “if it is allowable to ask the question, in what
direction have you been making enquiries?”

“I have been interesting myself,” Thorndyke replied, “in the other
case; that of your patient Mr. Maddock, as the attacks on you seemed
to be associated with his neighbourhood rather than with that of
Hampstead. I have examined his will at Somerset House and am
collecting information about the persons who benefited by its
provisions. Especially, I am making some enquiries about a legatee who
lives in New York, and concerning whom I am rather curious. I can’t go
into further details just now, but you will see that I am keeping the
case in hand, and you must remember that, at any moment, fresh
information may reach me from other sources. My practice is a very
peculiar one, and there are few really obscure cases that are not,
sooner or later, brought to me for an opinion.”

“And, meanwhile, I am to eat the bread of idleness here and wait on
events.”

“You won’t be entirely idle,” Thorndyke replied. “We shall find you
some work to do, and you will extend your knowledge of medico-legal
practice. You write shorthand fairly well, don’t you?”

“Yes; and I can draw a little, if that is of any use.”

“Both accomplishments are of use, and, even if they are not, we should
have to exercise them for the sake of appearances. It will certainly
become known that you are here, so we had better make no secret of it,
but find you such occupation as will account for your presence. And,
as you will have to meet strangers now and again, we must find you a
name. What do you think of ‘William Morgan Howard’?”

“It will do as well as any other,” I replied.

“Very well, then William Morgan Howard let it be. And, in case you
might forget your alias, as the crooks are constantly doing, we will
drop the name of Jardine and call you Howard even when we are alone.
It will save us all from an untimely slip.”

To this arrangement also I agreed with a sour smile, and so, with some
physical discomfort in the neighbourhood of the lower jaw, and a
certain relish of the novelty and absurdity of my position, I placed
myself, under the name of Howard, on the roster of Thorndyke’s
establishment.




 CHAPTER XVI.
 ENTER FATHER HUMPERDINCK

On the day following my--and Thorndyke’s--masterly retreat from
Salter’s Club, the plain-clothes officer called to make his report;
and even before he spoke, I judged from his rather sheepish expression
that he had failed. And so it turned out. He had waited in the
porter’s lodge, he told us, until midnight keeping a watch on the
watcher, who, for his part, lurked in the street, always keeping in
sight of the hospital, and whiling away the time by gazing into the
shop windows. The spy had evidently failed to recognize Thorndyke, for
when the latter left the hospital in company with one of the
physicians, he had given only a passing glance at the open carriage in
which the two men sat.

After the shops had shut, the persevering shadower had occupied
himself with a sort of dismal sentry-go up and down the street,
disappearing into the darkness and reappearing at regular intervals.
Once or twice, the plain-clothes man went out and followed his quarry
in his perambulations, but, not considering it prudent to expose
himself too much to view, he remained mostly in the Lodge. It was
after one of these sallies that the mischance occurred. Returning to
the Lodge, he saw the spy pass the gates and disappear up the dark
street; he looked, after the usual interval, for him to reappear. But
the interval passed and there was no reappearance. Then the officer
hurried out in search of his quarry, but found only an empty street.
Even the apparently inexhaustible patience of the spy had given out at
last. And so the quest had ended.

I cannot say that Thorndyke impressed me as being deeply disappointed;
in fact, I thought that he seemed, if anything, rather relieved at his
emissary’s failure. This was Jervis’s opinion also, and he had no
false delicacy about expressing it.

“Well,” Thorndyke replied, “as the fellow thrust himself right under
my nose, I could hardly do less than make some sort of an attempt to
find out who he is. But I don’t particularly want to know. My
investigations are proceeding from quite another direction; and you
see, Jervis, how awkward it might have been to have this person on our
hands. We could only charge him with loitering with felonious intent,
and we couldn’t prove the intent after all; for we can’t produce any
evidence connecting this man with the three attempted murders. He may
not be the same man at all. And I certainly don’t want to go into the
witness box just now, and still less do I want my new clerk, Mr.
Howard, put into that position. I don’t want to take any action until
I have the case quite complete and am in a position to make a decisive
move.”

“The truth is,” said Jervis, addressing me confidentially in a stage
whisper, “Thorndyke hates the idea of spoiling a really juicy problem
by merely arresting the criminal and pumping his friends. He looks on
such a proceeding much as a Master of Fox-hounds would look on the act
of poisoning a fox.”

Thorndyke smiled indulgently at his junior. “There is such a thing,”
said he, “as failing to poison a fox and only making him too unwell to
leave his residence. A premature prosecution is apt to fail; and then
the prisoner has seen all the cards of his adversaries. At present I
am playing against an unseen adversary, but I am hoping that I, in my
turn, am unseen by him, and I am pretty certain that he has no idea
what cards I hold.”

“Gad!” exclaimed Jervis, “then he is in much the same position as I
am.” And with this the subject dropped.

The first week of my residence in Thorndyke’s chambers was quite
uneventful, and was mainly occupied in settling down to the new
conditions. My letters were sent on by Mrs. Blunt to the hospital
whence they were brought by my principal--as I may now call my quondam
teacher--with the exception of Sylvia’s; which we had agreed were to
be sent to the chambers enclosed in an envelope addressed to
Thorndyke.

At first, I had feared that the confinement would be unendurable; but
the reality proved to be much less wearisome than I had anticipated. A
horizontal bar rigged up by Polton in the laboratory, gave me the
means of abundant exercise of one kind; and in the early mornings,
before the gates of the inn were opened, I made it my daily practice
to trot round the precincts for an hour at a time, taking the circuit
from our chambers through Crown Office Road to Fountain Court and back
by way of Pump Court and the Cloisters, to the great benefit of my
health and the mild surprise of the porters and laundresses.

Nor was I without occupation in the daytime. Besides an exhaustively
detailed account of all the remarkable experiences that had befallen
me of late which I wrote out at Thorndyke’s request, I had a good deal
of clerical work of one kind and another, and was frequently employed,
when clients called, in exhibiting my skill as a stenographer; taking
down oral statements, or making copies of depositions or other
documents which were read over to me by Thorndyke or Jervis.

It was the exercise of these latter activities that introduced me to a
certain Mr. Marchmont, and through him to some new and rather
startling experiences. Mr. Marchmont was a solicitor, and, as I
gathered, an old client of Thorndyke’s; for, when he called one
evening, about ten days after my arrival, with a bagful of documents,
he made sundry references to former cases by which I understood that
he and Thorndyke had been pretty frequently associated in their
professional affairs.

“I have got a lot of papers here,” he said, opening the bag, “of which
I suppose I ought to have had copies made; but there hasn’t been time
and I am afraid there won’t be, as I have to return them to-morrow.
But perhaps, if you run your eye over them, you will see what it is
necessary to remember and make a few notes.”

“I think,” said Thorndyke, “that my friend, Mr. Howard, will be able
to help us by taking down the essentials in shorthand. Let me
introduce you. Mr. Howard is very kindly assisting me for a time by
relieving me of some of the extra clerical work.”

Mr. Marchmont bowed, and, as we shook hands, looked at me, as I
thought, rather curiously; then he extracted the papers from his bag,
and, spreading them out on the table, briefly explained their nature.

“There is no need,” said he, “to have copies of them all, but I
thought you had better see them. Perhaps you will glance through them
and see which you think ought to be copied for reference.”

Thorndyke ran his eye over the documents, and, having made one or two
brief notes of the contents of some, which he then laid aside,
collected the remainder and began to read them out to me, while I took
down the matter verbatim, interpolating Marchmont’s comments and
explanations on a separate sheet of paper. The reading and the
discussion occupied a considerable time, and, before the business was
concluded, the Treasury clock had struck half-past nine.

“It’s getting late,” said Marchmont, folding the papers and putting
them back in the bag. “I must be going or you’ll wish me at Halifax,
if you aren’t doing so already.” He snapped the fastening of the bag,
and, grasping the handle, was about to lift it from the table, when he
appeared to recollect something, for he let go the handle and once
more faced my principal.

“By the way, Thorndyke,” said he, “there is a matter on which I have
wanted to consult you for some time past, but couldn’t get my client
to agree. It is a curious affair; quite in your line, I think; a case
of disappearance--not in the legal sense, as creating a presumption of
death, but disappearance from ordinary places of resort with a very
singular change of habits, so far as I can learn. Possibly a case of
commencing insanity. I have been wanting to lay the facts before you,
but my client, who is a Jesuit and as suspicious as the devil,
insisted on trying to ferret out the evidence for himself and wouldn’t
hear of a consultation with you. Of course he has failed completely,
and now, I think, he is more amenable.”

“Are you in possession of the facts, yourself?” asked Thorndyke.

“No, I’m hanged if I am,” replied Marchmont. “The case is concerned
with a certain Mr. Reinhardt, who was a client of my late partner,
poor Wyndhurst. I never had anything to do with him; and it
unfortunately happens that our old clerk, Bell--you remember Bell--who
had charge of Mr. Reinhardt’s business, left us soon after poor
Wyndhurst’s death, so there is nobody in the office who has any
personal knowledge of the parties.”

“You say it is a case of disappearance?” asked Thorndyke.

“Not exactly disappearance, but--well, it is a most singular case. I
can make nothing of it, and neither can my worthy and reverend client,
so as I say, he is now growing more amenable, and I think I shall be
able to persuade him to come round with me and take your opinion on
such facts as we have. Shall you be at home to-morrow evening?”

“Yes, I can make an appointment for to-morrow, after dinner, if you
prefer that time.”

“We won’t call it an appointment,” said Marchmont. “If I can overcome
his obstinacy, I will bring him round and take the chance of your
being in. But I think he’ll come, as he is on his beams’ ends; and if
he does, I fancy you will find the little problem exactly to your
liking.”

With this Mr. Marchmont took his departure, leaving Thorndyke and me
to discuss the various legal aspects of disappearance and the changes
of habit and temperament that usher in an attack of mental alienation.
I could see that the solicitor’s guarded references to an obscure and
intricate case had aroused Thorndyke’s curiosity to no small extent,
for, though he said little on the subject, it evidently remained in
his mind, as I judged by the care with which he planned the disposal
of his time of the following day, and the little preparations that he
made for the reception of his visitors. Nor was Thorndyke the only
expectant member of our little establishment. Jervis also, having
caught the scent of an interesting case, made it his business to keep
the evening free, and so it happened that when eight o’clock struck on
the Temple bell, it found us gathered round the fire, chatting on
indifferent subjects, but all three listening for the expected tread
on the stairs.

“It is to be hoped,” said Jervis, “that our reverend friend won’t jib
at the last moment. I always expect something good from Marchmont. He
doesn’t get flummoxed by anything simple or commonplace. I think we
have had most of our really thrilling cases through him. And seeing
that Jardine has laid in two whole quarto note-blocks and put those
delightful extra touches to his already alluring get-up--”

“There is no such person here as Jardine,” Thorndyke interrupted.

“I beg his pardon. Mr. Howard, I should have said. But listen! There
are two persons coming up the stairs. You had better take your place
at the table, Ja--Howard, and look beastly business-like, or the
reverend gentleman will want you chucked out, and then you’ll lose the
entertainment.”

I hurried across to the table and had just seated myself and taken up
a pen when the brass knocker on our inner door rattled out its
announcement. Thorndyke strode across and threw the door open, and as
Mr. Marchmont entered with his client I looked at the latter
inquisitively. But only for a single instant. Then I looked down and
tried to efface myself utterly, for Mr. Marchmont’s client was none
other than the cleric with whom I had travelled from Folkestone to
London.

The solicitor ushered in his client with an air of but half-concealed
triumph and proceeded with exaggerated geniality to do the honours of
introduction.

“Let me make you known to one another, gentlemen,” said he. “This is
the Very Reverend Father Humperdinck. These gentlemen are Dr.
Thorndyke, Dr. Jervis and Mr. Howard, who will act, on this occasion,
as the recording angel to take down in writing the particulars of your
very remarkable story.”

Father Humperdinck bowed stiffly. He was evidently a little
disconcerted at finding so large an assembly, and glanced at me, in
particular, with undisguised disfavour, while I, my oiled hair,
deformed eyebrows and false beard notwithstanding, perspired with
anxiety lest he should recognize me. But however unfavourably the
reverend father may have viewed our little conclave, Mr. Marchmont,
who had been watching him anxiously, gave him no chance of raising
objections, but proceeded to open the matter forthwith.

“I have not brought any digest or précis of the case,” said he,
“because I know you prefer to hear the facts from the actual parties.
But I had better give you a brief outline of the matter of our
inquiry. The case is concerned with a Mr. Vitalis Reinhardt, who has
been closely associated with Father Humperdinck for very many years
past, and who has now, without notice or explanation, disappeared from
his ordinary places of resort, ceased from communication with his
friends, and adopted a mode of life quite alien from and inconsistent
with his previous habits. Those are the main facts, stated in general
terms.”

“And the inquiry to which you referred?” said Thorndyke.

“Concerns itself with three questions,” replied Marchmont, and he
proceeded to check them off on his fingers. “First, is Vitalis
Reinhardt alive or dead? Second, if he is alive, where is he? Third,
having regard to the singular change in his habits, is his conduct
such as might render it possible to place him under restraint or to
prove him unfit to control his own affairs?”

“To certify him as insane, if I may put it bluntly,” said Thorndyke.
“That question could be decided only on a full knowledge of the nature
of the changes in this person’s habits, with which, no doubt, you are
prepared to furnish us. But what instantly strikes me in your epitome
of the proposed inquiry is this: you raise the question whether Mr.
Reinhardt is alive or dead, and then you refer to certain changes in
his habits; but, since a man must be alive to have any habits at all,
the two questions seem to be mutually irreconcilable in relation to
the same group of facts.”

Father Humperdinck nodded approvingly.

“Zat is chust our great diffigulty,” said he. “Zome zings make me
suspect zat my friend Reinhardt is dead; zome ozzer zings make me feel
certain zat he is alife. I do not know vich to zink. I am gombletely
buzzled.”

“Perhaps,” said Thorndyke, “the best plan would be for Father
Humperdinck to give us a detailed account of his relations with Mr.
Reinhardt and of the latter gentleman’s habits as they are known to
him; after which we could discuss any questions that suggest
themselves and clear up any points that seem to be obscure. What do
you say, Marchmont?”

“It will be a long story,” Marchmont replied, doubtfully.

“So much the better,” rejoined Thorndyke. “It will give us the more
matter for consideration. I would suggest that Father Humperdinck
tells us the story in his own way and that Mr. Howard takes down the
statement. Then we shall have the principal data and can pursue any
issue that seems to invite further investigation.”

To this proposal Marchmont agreed, a little reluctantly, fortifying
himself for the ordeal by lighting a cigar; and Father Humperdinck,
having cast a somewhat disparaging glance at me, began his account of
his missing friend, which I took down verbatim, and which I now
reproduce shorn of the speaker’s picturesque but rather tiresome
peculiarities of pronunciation.

“My acquaintance with Vitalis Reinhardt began more than forty years
ago, when we were both school-boys in the Jesuit’s house at Louvain.
But I did not see much of him then, as I was preparing for the
novitiate while he was on the secular side. In spite of his German
name, Vitalis was looked upon as an English boy, for his father had
married a rich English lady and was settled in England; and Vitalis,
being the only child, had very great expectations. When he left school
I lost sight of him for some years, and it was only after the war had
broken out between Germany and France that we met again. I had then
just been ordained and was attached as chaplain to a Bavarian
regiment; he had come out from England as a volunteer to attend the
sick and wounded; and so we met, soon after the battle of Saarbrück,
in the wards of a temporary hospital. But our career in the field was
not a long one. Less than a month after Saarbrück, our little force
met a French division and had to retreat, leaving a number of men and
guns and all the wounded in the hands of the enemy. Both of us were
among the prisoners, and Vitalis was one of the wounded, for, just as
the retreat began, a French bullet struck him in the right hip. We
were both taken to Paris with the rest of the prisoners, and there, in
the hospital for wounded prisoners, I was allowed to visit him.

“His wound was a severe one. The bullet had entered deeply and lodged
behind the bone of the hip, so that the repeated efforts of the
surgeons to extract it not only failed but caused great pain and made
the wound worse. From day to day poor Vitalis grew thinner and more
yellow, and we could see plainly that if no change occurred, the end
must come quite soon. So the doctors said and so Vitalis himself felt.

“Then it came to me that, if the skill of man failed us, we should ask
for help from above. It happened that I possessed a relic of the
blessed Saint Vincent de Paul, which was contained in a small gold
reliquary, and which I had been permitted by the Father General to
keep. I proposed to Vitalis that we should apply the relic and make a
special appeal to the saint for help, and also that he should promise
to dedicate some part of his great possessions to the service of God.

“He agreed readily, for he had always been a deeply pious man.
Accordingly he made the promises as I had suggested, we offered up
special prayers to the saint, and, with the permission of the
surgeons, I attached the reliquary to the dressings of the wound,
praying that it should avail to draw out the bullet.”

“And did it?” asked Marchmont in a tone which evidently did not escape
the observant Jesuit, for that nimble-witted gentleman turned sharply
on the lawyer and replied with severe emphasis:

“No, sir, it did not. And why? Because there was no need. The very
next day after the reliquary was applied, when the dressings were
changed, a small shred of filthy cloth came out of the wound. _That_
was the cause of the trouble, not the clean metal bullet. The saint,
you see, sir, knew better than the surgeon.”

“Evidently,” said Marchmont, glancing quickly at me, and the
expression that I caught in the eye of that elderly heathen suggested
that he had actually contemplated a wink and then thought better of
it.

“As soon as the piece of cloth was out of the wound,” Father
Humperdinck resumed, “all the trouble ceased. The fever abated, the
wound healed, and very soon Vitalis was able to get about, none the
worse for his mishap.

“It was natural that he should be grateful to the saint who had saved
his life, for though we look forward to the hereafter, we do not wish
to die. Also was it natural that he should feel a devotion to the holy
relic which had been the appointed instrument of his recovery. He did,
and to gratify him, I obtained the Father General’s permission to
bestow it on him, which gave him great joy, and thenceforth he always
carried the reliquary on his person.”

“I hope he kept his promise to the saint,” said Marchmont.

“He did; faithfully, and, indeed, handsomely. No sooner was he
recovered of his wound than he proposed to me the founding of a new
society of brothers of charity to attend the sick and wounded. I
consulted with the Father General of my Society--the Society of
Jesus--and received his sanction to act as director of the new society
or fraternity which was to be affiliated to the Society of Jesus under
the title of ‘The Poor Brothers of Saint Joseph of Aramithea.’”

“Why not Saint Vincent de Paul?” asked Marchmont.

“Because there was already a society named after that saint, and
because Saint Joseph was a man of eminent charity. But I shall not
weary you with a history of our society. It was founded and blessed by
His Holiness, the Pope, it prospered, and it still prospers to the
glory of God and to the benefit and relief of the sick, the poor, and
the suffering. At first Vitalis paid all the costs, and he has been a
generous benefactor ever since.”

“This is all extremely interesting,” said Marchmont, “but--you will
excuse my asking--has it any bearing on your friend’s disappearance?”

“Yes, sir, it has,” replied Father Humperdinck, “as you shall berceive
ven I my narradive gondinue.”

Mr. Marchmont bowed, and Father Humperdinck, quite undisturbed by the
interruption, “gondinued his narradive.”

“Our first house was established in Belgium, near Brussels, and
Vitalis came to live with us in community. He did not regularly join
the society or take any vows, but he lived with us as one of ourselves
and wore the habit of a lay brother when in the house and the dress of
one when he went abroad. This he has continued to do ever since.
Though bound by no vows, he has lived the life of a professed
religious by choice, occupying an ordinary cell for sleeping and
taking his meals at the refectory table. But not always. From time to
time he has taken little holidays to travel about and mix with the
outer world. Sometimes he would come to England to visit his
relatives, and sometimes he would spend a few weeks in one of the
great cities of the Continent, looking over the museums and
picture-galleries. He was greatly interested in art and liked to
frequent the society of painters and sculptors, of whom he knew
several; and one, in particular--an English painter named Burton,
whose acquaintance he made quite recently--he seemed very much
attached to, for he stayed with him at Bruges for more than a month.

“When he came back from Bruges, he told me that he purposed going to
England to see his relatives and to make certain arrangements with his
lawyers for securing a part of his property to our Society. I had
often urged him to do this, but, hitherto, he had retained complete
control of his property and only paid the expenses of the Society as
they occurred. He was most generous, but, of course, this was a bad
arrangement, because, in the event of his death, we should have been
left without the support that he had promised. It seemed that while he
was at Bruges he had discussed this matter with Mr. Burton, who was a
Catholic, and that the Englishman also had advised him to make a
permanent provision for the Society. It seemed that he had decided to
divide his property between our community and a cousin of his who
lives in England, a project of which I strongly approved. After
staying with us for a month or two, he left for England with the
purpose of making this arrangement. That was in the middle of last
September, and I have not seen him since.”

“Did he complete the arrangements that he had mentioned?” Thorndyke
asked.

“No, he did not. He made certain arrangements as to his property, but
they were very different ones from those he had proposed. But we shall
come to that presently. Let me finish my story.

“A few days after Vitalis left us, our oldest lay brother was taken
very seriously ill. I wrote to Vitalis, who was deeply attached to
Brother Bartholomew, telling him of this, and, as I did not know where
he was staying, I sent the letter to his cousin’s house at Hampstead.
He replied, on the eighteenth of September, that he should return
immediately. He said that he was then booking his luggage and paying
his hotel bill; that he had to see his cousin again, but that he would
try to come by the night train, or if he missed that, he would sleep
at the station hotel and start as early as possible on the following
day, the nineteenth. That was the last I ever heard from him. He never
came and has never communicated with me since.”

“You have made enquiries, of course?” said Thorndyke.

“Yes. When he did not come, I wrote to his lawyer, Mr. Wyndhurst, whom
I knew slightly. But Mr. Wyndhurst was dead, and my letter was
answered by Mr. Marchmont. From him I learned that Vitalis had called
on him on the morning of the nineteenth and made certain arrangements
of which he, perhaps, will tell you. Mr. Marchmont ascertained that,
on the same day, Vitalis’s luggage was taken from the cloak room in
time to catch the boat train. I have made inquiries and find that he
arrived at Calais, and I have succeeded in tracing him to Paris, but
there I have lost him. Where he is now I am unable to discover.

“And now, before I finish my story, you had better hear what Mr.
Marchmont has to tell. He has been very close with me, but you are a
lawyer and perhaps know better how to deal with lawyers.”

Thorndyke glanced enquiringly at the solicitor, who, in his turn,
looked dubiously at the end of his waning cigar.

“The fact is,” said he, “I am in a rather difficult position. Mr.
Reinhardt has employed me as his solicitor, and I don’t quite see my
way to discussing his private affairs without his authority.”

“That is a perfectly correct attitude,” said Thorndyke, “and yet I am
going to urge you to tell us what passed at your interview with your
client. I can’t go into particulars at present, but I will ask you to
take it from me that there are sound reasons why you should; and I
will undertake to hold you immune from any blame for having done so.”

Marchmont looked sharply and with evidently awakened interest at
Thorndyke.

“I think I know what that means,” he said, “and I will take you at
your word, having learned by experience what your word is worth. But
before describing the interview, I had better let you know how
Reinhardt had previously disposed of his property.

“About twelve years ago he got Wyndhurst to draft a will for him by
which a life interest in the entire property was vested in his cousin,
a Miss Augusta Vyne, with reversion to her niece, Sylvia Vyne, the
only child of his cousin Robert. This will was duly executed in our
office.

“After that our firm had, until quite recently, no special business to
transact for Mr. Reinhardt beyond the management of his investments.
The whole of his property--which was all personal--was in our hands to
invest, and our relations with him were confined to the transfer of
sums of money to his bank when we received instructions from him to
effect such transfer. He never called at the office, and latterly
there has been no one there who knew him excepting Wyndhurst himself
and the clerk, Bell.

“The next development occurred last September. On the seventeenth I
received a letter from him, written at Miss Vyne’s house at Hampstead,
saying that he had been discussing his affairs with her and that he
should like to call on me and make some slight alterations in the
disposal of the property. I replied on the eighteenth, addressing my
letter to him at Miss Vyne’s house, making an appointment for eleven
o’clock on the morning of the nineteenth. He kept the appointment
punctually, and we had a short interview, at which he explained the
new arrangements which he wished to make.

“He began by saying that he had found it somewhat inconvenient,
living, as he did, on the Continent, to have his account at an English
Bank. He proposed, therefore, to transfer it to a private bank at
Paris, conducted by a certain M. Desiré, or rather to open an account
there, for he did not suggest closing his account at his English
bank.”

“Do you know anything about this M. Desiré?” asked Thorndyke.

“I did not, but I have since ascertained that he is a person of
credit--quite a substantial man in fact--and that his business is
chiefly that of private banker and agent to the officers of the army.

“Well, Mr. Reinhardt went on to say that he had become rather tired of
the monotonous life of a lay brother--which he, after all, was
not--and wished for a little freedom and change. Accordingly he
intended to travel for a time--which was his reason for employing M.
Desiré--and did not propose, necessarily, to keep anyone informed of
his whereabouts. He was a rich man and he had decided to get some
advantage from his wealth, which really did not seem to me at all an
unreasonable decision. He added that he had no intention of
withdrawing his support from the Society of the Poor Brothers; he
merely intended to dissociate himself, personally, from it, and he
suggested that any occasions that might arise for pecuniary assistance
should be addressed to him under cover of M. Desiré.

“Finally, he desired me to transfer one thousand pounds stock to his
new agent seven days from the date of our interview, and gave me an
authority in writing to that effect in which he instructed me to
accept M. Desiré’s receipt as a valid discharge.”

“And you did so?” asked Thorndyke.

“Certainly I did. And I hold M. Desiré’s receipt for the amount.”

“Did you think it necessary to raise the question of your client’s
identity, seeing that no one in the office knew him personally?”

“No, I did not. The question did not arise. There could not possibly
be any doubt on the subject. He was an old client of the firm, and our
correspondence had been carried on under cover of his cousin, Miss
Vyne, who had known him all his life. You remember that I wrote to him
at Miss Vyne’s address, making the appointment for the interview.”

“And what happened next?”

“The next development was a letter from Father Humperdinck asking if I
could give him Mr. Reinhardt’s address. Of course I could not, but I
wrote to M. Desiré asking him if he could give it to me. Desiré
replied that he did not, at the moment, know where Mr. Reinhardt was,
but would, if desired, take charge of any communications and forward
them at the first opportunity. This statement may or may not have been
true, but I don’t think we shall get any more information out of
Desiré. He is Reinhardt’s agent and will act on his instructions. If
Reinhardt has told him not to give anyone his address, naturally he
won’t give it. So there the matter ends, so far as I am concerned.”

“Did Vitalis make no suggestion as to altering his will?” Father
Humperdinck enquired.

“None whatever. Nothing was said about the will. But,” Mr. Marchmont
added, after a cogitative pause, “we must remember that he has another
man of business now. There is no saying what he may have done through
M. Desiré.”

Father Humperdinck nodded gloomily, and Thorndyke, addressing the
solicitor, asked:

“And that is all you have to tell us?”

“Yes. And I’m not sure that it is not a good deal more than I ought to
have told you. It is Father Humperdinck’s turn now.”

The Jesuit acknowledged the invitation to resume his narrative by a
stiff bow and then proceeded:

“You can now see, sir, that what I said is perfectly correct. The
conduct of my friend Vitalis shows a sudden and unaccountable change.
It is quite inconsistent with his habits and his way of thinking. And
the change is, as I say, so sudden. One day he is coming with the
greatest haste to the bedside of his sick friend, Brother Bartholomew,
the next he is making arrangements for a life of selfish pleasure,
utterly indifferent as to whether that friend is alive or dead. As a
matter of fact, the good brother passed away to his reward the day
after Vitalis should have arrived, without even a message from his old
friend. But now I return to my story.

“When Vitalis failed to appear, and I could get no news of him, I
became very anxious; and, as it happened that the business of our
Society called me to England, I determined to inquire into the matter.
Circumstances compelled me to travel by way of Boulogne and cross to
Folkestone. I say ‘circumstances,’ but I should rather say that I was
guided that way by the hand of Providence, for, in the train that
brought me from Folkestone to London, I had a most astonishing
experience. In the carriage, alone with me, there travelled a young
man, a very strange young man indeed. He was a very large man--or, I
should say, very high--and in appearance rather fierce and wild. His
clothes were good, but they were disordered and stained with mud, as
if he had been drunk at night and had rolled in the gutter. And this,
I think, was the case, for, soon after we had started, he began to
turn out his pockets on the seat of the carriage, as if to see whether
he had lost anything during his debauch. And then it was that I saw a
most astonishing thing. Among the objects that this man took from his
pockets and laid on the seat, was the reliquary that I had given so
many years ago to Vitalis.

“I could not mistake it. Once it had been mine, and I had been
accustomed to see it almost daily since. Moreover the young man had
the effrontery to pass it to me that I might examine it, and I found
on it the very letters which I, myself, had caused to be engraved on
it. When I asked him where he had obtained it, he told me that he had
picked it up at Hampstead, and he professed not to know what it was.
But his answers were very evasive and I did not believe him.”

“Nevertheless,” said Mr. Marchmont, “there was nothing improbable in
his statement. Mr. Reinhardt had been at Hampstead and might have
dropped it.”

“Possibly. But he would have taken measures to recover it. He would
not have left England until he had found it. He was a rich man, and he
would have offered a large reward for this his most prized
possession.”

“You say,” said Thorndyke, “that he habitually carried this reliquary
on his person. Can you tell us how he carried or wore it?”

“That,” replied Father Humperdinck, “was what I was coming to. The
reliquary was a small gold object with a ring at each end. It was
meant, I suppose, to be worn round the wrist, or perhaps the neck, by
means of a cord or chain attached to the two rings, or to be inserted
into a chaplet of devotional beads. But this was not the way in which
Vitalis carried it. He possessed a small and very beautiful crucifix
which he set great store by, because it was given to him by one of the
fathers when he left school, and which he used to wear suspended from
his neck by a green silk cord. Now, when I gave him the reliquary, he
caused a goldsmith to link one of its rings to the ring of the
crucifix and he fastened the silk cord to the other ring, and so
suspended both the reliquary and the crucifix from his neck.”

“Did he wear them outside his clothing so that they were visible?”
Thorndyke asked.

“Yes, outside his waistcoat, so that they were not only visible but
very conspicuous when his coat was unbuttoned. It was, of course, very
unsuitable to the dress of a lay brother, and I spoke to him about it
several times. But he was sometimes rather self-willed, as you may
judge by his refusal to settle an endowment on the Society, and,
naturally, as he was not professed, I had no authority over him. But I
shall return presently to the reliquary. Now I continue about this
young man.

“When I had heard his explanation, and decided that he was telling me
lies, I made a simple pretext to discover his name and place of abode.
With the same effrontery, he gave me his card, which I have here, and
which, you will see, is stained with mud, owing, no doubt, to those
wallowings in the mire of which I have spoken.” He drew the card from
his pocket-book and handed it to Thorndyke, who read it gravely, and,
pushing it across the table to me, said, without moving a muscle of
his face:

“You had better copy it into your notes, Mr. Howard, so that we may
have the record complete.”

I accordingly copied out my own name and address with due solemnity
and a growing enjoyment of the situation, and then returned the card
to Father Humperdinck, who pocketed it carefully and resumed:

“Having the name and address of this young man, I telegraphed
immediately to a private detective bureau in Paris, asking to have
sent to me, if possible, a certain M. Foucault, who makes a specialty
of following and watching suspected persons. This Foucault is a man of
extraordinary talent. His power of disguising himself is beyond belief
and his patience is inexhaustible. Fortunately he was disengaged and
came to me without delay, and, when I had given him the name and
address of this young man, Jardine, and described him from my
recollection of him, he set a watch on the house and found that the
man was really living there, as he had said, and that he made a daily
journey to the hospital of St. Margaret’s, where he seemed to have
some business, as he usually stayed there until evening.”

“St. Margaret’s!” exclaimed Marchmont. “Why that is your hospital,
Thorndyke. Do you happen to know this man Jardine?”

“There is, or was, a student of that name, who qualified some little
time ago, and who is probably the man Father Humperdinck is referring
to. A tall man; quite as tall, I should say, as my friend here, Mr.
Howard.”

“I should say,” said Father Humperdinck, “that the man, Jardine, is
taller, decidedly taller. I watched him as I walked behind him up the
platform at Charing Cross, and M. Foucault has shown him to me since.
But that matters not. Have you seen the man, Jardine, lately at the
hospital?”

“Not very lately,” Thorndyke replied. “I saw him there nearly a
fortnight ago, but that, I think, was the last time.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Humperdinck. “Exactly. But I shall continue my story.
For some time M. Foucault kept a close watch on this man, but
discovered nothing fresh. He went to the hospital daily, he came home,
and he stayed indoors the whole evening. But, at last, there came a
new discovery.

“One morning M. Foucault saw the man, Jardine, come out of his house,
dressed more carefully than usual. From his house, Foucault followed
him to a picture gallery in Leicester Square and went in after him;
and there he saw him meet a female, evidently by a previous
assignation. AND,” Father Humperdinck continued, slapping the table to
emphasize the climax of his story,
“From--the--neck--of--that--female--was--hanging--_Vitalis_--_Reinhardt’s_--Crucifix!”

Having made this thrilling communication, our reverend client leaned
back to watch its effect on his audience. I am afraid he must have
been a little disappointed, for Thorndyke was habitually impassive in
his exterior, and, as for Jervis and me, we were fully occupied in
maintaining a decent and befitting gravity. But Marchmont--the only
person present who was not already acquainted with the incident--saved
the situation by exclaiming:

“Very remarkable! Very remarkable indeed!”

“It is more than remarkable,” said Father Humperdinck. “It is highly
suspicious. You observe that the reliquary and the crucifix had been
linked together. Now they are separated, and since both the rings of
the reliquary were unbroken, it follows that the ring of the crucifix
must have been cut through and a new one made, by which to suspend
it.”

“I don’t see anything particularly suspicious in that,” said
Marchmont. “If Jardine found the two articles fixed together,
and--having failed to discover the owner--wished to give the crucifix
to his friend, it is not unnatural that he should have separated
them.”

“I do not believe that he found them,” Father Humperdinck replied
doggedly; “but I shall continue my story and you will see. There is
not much more to tell.

“It seems that the man, Jardine, suspected Foucault of watching him,
for presently he left the gallery in company with the female, and,
after being followed for some distance, he managed to escape. As soon
as Foucault found that he had lost him, he went to Jardine’s house and
waited about the neighbourhood, and an hour or two later he had the
good fortune to see him coming from Hampstead towards Highgate, in
company with another female. He followed them until they entered a
narrow passage or lane that leads up the hill, and when they had gone
up this some distance, he followed, but could not get near enough to
hear what they were saying.

“And now he had a most strange and terrible experience. For some time
past he had felt a suspicion that some person--some accomplice of
Jardine’s perhaps--was following and watching him; and now he had
proof of it. At the top of the lane, Jardine stopped to talk to the
female, and Foucault crept on tiptoe towards him; and while he was
doing so, he heard someone approaching stealthily up the lane, behind
him. Suddenly, Jardine began to return down the lane. As it was not
convenient for Foucault to meet him there, he also turned and walked
back; and then he heard a sound as if someone were climbing the high
wooden fence that enclosed the lane. Then Jardine began to run, and
Foucault was compelled also to run but he would have been overtaken if
it had not happened that Jardine fell down.

“Now, just as he heard Jardine fall, he came to a broken place in the
fence, and it occurred to him to creep through the hole and hide while
Jardine passed. He accordingly began to do so, but no sooner had he
thrust his head through the hole than some unseen ruffian dealt him a
violent blow which rendered him instantly insensible. When he
recovered his senses, he found himself lying in a churchyard which
adjoins the lane, but Jardine and the other ruffian were, of course,
nowhere to be seen.

“And now I come to the last incident that I have to relate. The
assault took place on a Saturday; on the Sunday M. Foucault was
somewhat indisposed and unable to go out, but early on Monday he
resumed his watch on Jardine’s house. It was nearly noon when Jardine
came out, dressed as if for travelling and carrying a valise. He went
first to a house near Piccadilly and from thence to the hospital in a
cab. Foucault followed in another cab and saw him go into the hospital
and waited for him to come out. But he never came. Foucault waited
until midnight, but he did not come out. He had vanished.”

“He had probably come out by a back exit and gone home,” said
Marchmont.

“Not so,” replied Humperdinck. “The next day Foucault watched
Jardine’s house, but he did not come there. Then he made enquiries;
but Jardine is not there, and the landlady does not know where he is.
Also the porter at the hospital knows nothing and is not at all
polite. The man Jardine has disappeared as if he had never been.”

“That really is rather queer,” said Marchmont. “It is a pity that you
did not give me all these particulars at first. However, that can’t be
helped now. Is this all that you have to tell us?”

“It is all; unless there is anything that you wish to ask me.”

“I think,” said Thorndyke, “that it would be well for us to have a
description of Mr. Reinhardt; and, as we have to trace him, if
possible, a photograph would be exceedingly useful.”

“I have not a photograph with me,” said Father Humperdinck, “but I
will obtain one and send it to you. Meanwhile I will tell you what my
friend Vitalis is like. He is sixty-two years of age, spare, upright,
rather tall--his height is a hundred and seventy-three centimetres--”

“Roughly five feet nine,” interposed Thorndyke.

“His hair is nearly white, he is, of course, clean shaven, he has grey
eyes, a straight nose, not very prominent, and remarkably good teeth
for his age, which he shows somewhat when he talks. I think he is a
little vain about his teeth and he well may be, for there are not many
men of sixty-two who have not a single false tooth, nor even one that
has been stopped by the dentist. As to his clothing, he wears the
ordinary dress of a lay brother, which you are probably familiar with,
and he nearly always wears gloves, even indoors.”

“Is there any reason for his wearing gloves?” Thorndyke asked.

“Not now. The habit began when he had some affliction of the skin,
which made it necessary for him to keep his hands covered with gloves
which contained some ointment or dressing, and afterwards for a time
to conceal the disagreeable appearance of the skin. The habit having
been once formed, he continued it, saying that his hands were more
comfortable covered up than when exposed to the air.”

“Was he dressed in this fashion when he called at your office,
Marchmont?” asked Thorndyke.

“Yes. Even to the gloves. I noticed, with some surprise, that he did
not take them off even when he wrote and signed the note of which I
told you.”

“Was he then wearing the reliquary and crucifix as Father Humperdinck
has described, on the front of his waistcoat?”

“He may have been, but I didn’t notice them, as I fancy I should have
done if they had been there.”

“And you have nothing more to tell us, Father Humperdinck, as to your
friend’s personal appearance?”

“No. I will send you the photograph and write to you if I think of
anything that I have forgotten. And now, perhaps you can tell me if
you think that you will be able to answer those questions that Mr.
Marchmont put to you.”

“I cannot, of course, answer them now,” replied Thorndyke. “The facts
that you have given us will have to be considered and compared, and
certain enquiries will have to be made. Are you staying long in
England?”

“I shall be here for at least a month; and I may as well leave you my
address, although Mr. Marchmont has it.”

“In the course of a month,” Thorndyke said, as he took the proffered
card, “I think I may promise you that we shall have settled definitely
whether your friend is alive or dead; and if we find that he is alive,
we shall, no doubt, be able to ascertain his whereabouts.”

“That is very satisfactory,” said Father Humperdinck. “I hope you
shall be able to make good your promise.”

With this he rose, and, having shaken hands stiffly with Thorndyke,
bestowed on Jervis and me a ceremonious bow and moved towards the
door. I thought that Marchmont looked a little wistful, as if he would
have liked to stay and have a few words with us alone; indeed, he
lingered for a moment or two after the door was open, but then,
apparently altering his mind, he wished us “good-night” and followed
his client.




 CHAPTER XVII.
 THE PALIMPSEST

It was getting late when our friends left us, but nevertheless, as
soon as they were gone, we all drew our chairs up to the fire with the
obvious intention of discussing the situation and began, with one
accord, to fill our pipes. Jervis was the first to get his tobacco
alight, and, having emitted a voluminous preliminary puff, he
proceeded to open the debate.

“That man, Jardine, seems to be a pretty desperate character. Just
think of his actually wallowing in the mire--not merely rolling, mind
you, but wallowing--and of his repulsive habit of consorting with
females; one after the other, too, in rapid succession. It’s a
shocking instance of depravity.”

“Our reverend friend,” said Thorndyke, “reaches his conclusions by a
rather short route--in some cases, at least; in others, his methods
seem a little indirect and roundabout.”

“Yes,” agreed Jervis, “he’s a devil at guessing. But he didn’t get
much food for the imagination out of the man, Thorndyke. Why were you
so extraordinarily secretive? With what he told you and what you knew
before, you could surely have suggested a line of inquiry. Why didn’t
you?”

“Principally because of the man’s personality. I could not have
answered his questions; I could only have suggested one or two highly
probable solutions of the problem that he offered and partial
solutions at that. But I am not much addicted to giving partial
solutions or to handing over the raw material of a promising inquiry.
Certainly, not to a man like this, who seems incapable of a
straightforward action.”

“The reverend father,” said Jervis, “does certainly seem to be a
rather unnecessarily downy bird. And he doesn’t seem to have got much
by his excessive artfulness, after all.”

“No,” agreed Thorndyke; “nothing whatever. Quite the contrary, in
fact. Look at his ridiculous conduct in respect of ‘the man Jardine.’
I don’t complain of his having taken the precaution to obtain that
malefactor’s address; but, when he had got it, if he had not been so
tortuous, so eager to be cunning; if, in short, he had behaved like an
ordinary sensible man, he would have got, at once, all the information
that Jardine had to give. He could have called on Jardine, written to
him, employed a lawyer or applied to the police. Either of these
simple and obvious plans would have been successful; instead of which,
he must needs go to the trouble and expense of engaging this absurd
spy.”

“Who found a mare’s nest and got his head thumped,” remarked Jervis.

“Then,” continued Thorndyke, “look at his behaviour to Marchmont.
Evidently he put the case into Marchmont’s hands, but, equally
evident, he withheld material facts and secretly tinkered at the case
himself. No, Jervis, I give no information to Father Humperdinck until
I have this case complete to the last rivet. But, all the same, I am
greatly obliged to him, and especially to Marchmont for bringing him
here. He has given us a connected story to collate with our rather
loose collection of facts and, what is perhaps more important, he has
put our investigation on a business footing. That is a great
advantage. If I should want to invoke the aid of the powers that be, I
can do so now with a definite _locus standi_ as the legal
representative of interested parties.”

“I can’t imagine,” said I, “in what direction you are going to push
your inquiries. Father Humperdinck has given us, as you say, a
connected story, but it is a very unexpected one, to me, at least, and
does not fall into line at all with what we know--that is, if you are
assuming, as I have been, that the man whom I saw lying in Millfield
Lane was Vitalis Reinhardt.”

“It is difficult,” replied Thorndyke, “to avoid that assumption,
though we must be on our guard against coincidences; but the man whom
you saw agreed with the description that has been given to us, we know
that Reinhardt was in the neighbourhood on that day, and you found the
reliquary on the following morning in the immediate vicinity. We seem
to be committed to the hypothesis that the man was Reinhardt unless we
can prove that he was someone else, or that Reinhardt was in some
other place at the time; which at present we cannot.”

“Then,” said I, “in that case, the Bobby must have been right, after
all. The man couldn’t have been dead, seeing that he called on
Marchmont the following day and was afterwards traced to Paris. But I
must say that he looked as dead as Queen Anne. It just shows how
careful one ought to be in giving opinions.”

“Some authority has said,” remarked Jervis, “that the only conclusive
proof of death is decomposition. I believe it was old Taylor who said
so, and I am inclined to think that he wasn’t far wrong.”

“But,” said Thorndyke, “assuming that the man whom you saw was
Reinhardt, and that he was not dead how do you explain the other
circumstances? Was he insensible from the effects of injury or drugs?
Or was he deliberately shamming insensibility? Was it he who passed
over the fence? and if so, did he climb over unassisted or was he
helped over? And what answers do you suggest to the questions that
Marchmont propounded? You answer his first question: ‘Is Reinhardt
alive?’ in the affirmative. What about the others?”

“As to where he is,” I replied, “I can only say, the Lord knows;
probably skulking somewhere on the Continent. As to his state of mind,
the facts seem to suggest that, in vulgar parlance, he has gone off
his onion. He must be as mad as a hatter to have behaved in the way
that he has. For, even assuming that he wanted to get clear of the
Poor Brothers of Saint Jeremiah Diddler without explicitly saying so,
he adopted a fool’s plan. There is no sense in masquerading as a
corpse one day and turning up smiling at your lawyer’s office the
next. If he meant to be dead, he should have stuck to it and remained
dead.”

“The objection to that,” said Jervis, “is that Marchmont would have
proceeded to get permission to presume death and administer the will.”

“I see. Then I can only suppose that he had got infected by Father
Humperdinck and resolved to be artful at all costs and hang the
consequences.”

“Then,” said Thorndyke, “I understand your view to be that Reinhardt
is at present hiding somewhere on the Continent and that his mind is
more or less affected.”

“Yes. Though as to his being unfit to control his own affairs, I am
not so clear. I fancy there was more evidence in that direction when
he was forking out the bulk of his income to maintain the poverty of
the Poor Brothers. But the truth is, I haven’t any opinions on the
case at all. I am in a complete fog about the whole affair.”

“And no wonder,” said Jervis. “One set of facts seems to suggest most
strongly that Reinhardt must certainly be dead. Another set of facts
seems to prove beyond doubt that he was alive, at least after that
affair in Millfield Lane. He may be perpetrating an elephantine
practical joke on the Poor Brothers; but that doesn’t seem to be
particularly probable. The whole case is a tangle of contradictions
which one might regard as beyond unravelment if it were not for a
single clear and intelligible fact.”

“What is that?” I asked.

“That my revered senior has undertaken to furnish a solution in the
course of a month; from which I gather that my revered senior has
something up his sleeve.”

“There is nothing up my sleeve,” said Thorndyke, “that might not
equally well be up yours. I have made no separate investigations. The
actual data which I possess were acquired in the presence of one or
both of you, and are now the common property of us all. I am
referring, of course, to the original data, not to fresh matter
obtained by inference from, or further examination of those data.”

Jervis smiled sardonically. “It is the old story,” said he. “The
magician offers you his hat to inspect.

“You observe, ladies and gentlemen, that there is no deception. You
can look inside it and examine the lining, and you can also inspect
the top of my head. I now put on my hat. I now take it off again and
you notice that there is a guinea pig sitting in it. There was no
deception, ladies and gentlemen, you had all the data.”

Thorndyke laughed and shook his head.

“That’s all nonsense, Jervis,” he said. “It is a false analogy. I have
done nothing to divert your attention. The guinea pig has been staring
you in the face all the time.”

“Very rude of him,” murmured Jervis.

“I have even drawn your attention to him once or twice. But,
seriously, I don’t think that this case is so very obscure, though
mind you, it is a mere hypothesis so far as I am concerned, and may
break down completely when I come to apply the tests that I have in
view. But what I mean is, that the facts known to us suggested a very
obvious hypothesis and that the suggestion was offered equally to us
all. The verification may fail, but that is another matter.”

“Are you going to work at the case immediately?” I asked.

“No,” Thorndyke replied. “Jervis and I have to attend at the Maidstone
Assizes for the next few days. We are retained on a case which
involves some very important issues in relation to life assurance, and
that will take up most of our time. So this other affair will have to
wait.”

“And meanwhile,” said Jervis, “you will stay at home like a good boy
and mind the shop; and I suppose we shall have to find you something
to do, to keep you out of mischief. What do you say to making a
longhand transcript of Father Humperdinck’s statement?”

“Yes, you had better do that,” said Thorndyke; “and attach it to the
original shorthand copy. And now we must really turn in or we shall
never be ready for our start in the morning.”

The transcription of Father Humperdinck’s statement gave me abundant
occupation for the whole of the following morning. But when that was
finished, I was without any definite employment, and, though I was not
in the least dull--for I was accustomed to a solitary life--I suppose
I was in that state of susceptibility to mischief that is proverbially
associated with unemployment. And in these untoward circumstances I
was suddenly exposed to a great temptation; and after some feeble
efforts at resistance, succumbed ignominiously.

I shall offer no excuses for my conduct nor seek in any way to
mitigate the judgment that all discreet persons will pass upon my
folly. I make no claims to discretion or to the caution and foresight
of a man like Thorndyke. At this time I was an impulsive and rather
heedless young man, and my actions were pretty much those which might
have been expected from a person of such temperament.

The voice of the tempter issued in the first place from our
letter-box, and assumed the sound of the falling of letters thereinto.
I hastened to extract the catch, and sorting out the envelopes,
selected one, the superscription of which was in Sylvia’s now familiar
handwriting. It was actually addressed to Dr. Thorndyke, but a private
mark, on which we had agreed, exposed that naïvely pious fraud and
gave me the right to open it; which I did, and seated myself in the
armchair to enjoy its perusal at my ease.

It was a delightful letter; bright, gossipy and full of frank and
intimate friendliness. As I read it, the trim, graceful figure and
pretty face of the writer rose before me and made me wonder a little
discontentedly how long it would be before I should look on her and
hear her voice again. It was now getting into the third week since I
had last seen her, and, as the time passed, I was feeling more and
more how great a blank in my life the separation from her had caused.
Our friendship had grown up in a quiet and unsensational fashion and I
suppose I had not realized all that it meant; but I was realizing it
now; and, as I conned over her letter, with its little personal notes
and familiar turns of expression, I began to be consumed with a desire
to see her, to hear her speak, to tell her that she was not as other
women to me, and to claim a like special place in her thoughts.

It was towards the end of the letter that the tempter spoke out in
clear and unmistakable language, and these were the words that he
used, through the medium of the innocent and unconscious Sylvia:

“You remember those sketches that you stole for me--‘pinched,’ I think
was your own expression. Well, I have cleaned off the daubs of paint
with which they had been disfigured and put them in rough frames in my
studio. All but one; and I began on that yesterday with a scraper and
a rag dipped in chloroform. But I took off, not only the defacing
marks but part of the surface as well; and then I got such a surprise!
I shan’t tell you what the surprise was, because you’ll see, when you
come out of the house of bondage. I am going to work on it again
to-morrow, and perhaps I shall get the transformation finished. How I
wish you could come and see it done! It takes away more than half the
joy of exploration not to be able to share the discovery with you; in
fact, I have a good mind to leave it unfinished so that we can
complete the transformation together.”

Now, I need not say that, as to the precious sketches, I cared not a
fig what was under the top coat of paint. What I did care for was that
this dear maid was missing me as I missed her; was wanting my sympathy
with her little interests and pleasures and was telling me, half
unconsciously, perhaps, that my absence had created a blank in her
life, as her absence had in mine. And forthwith I began to ask myself
whether there was really any good reason why I should not, just for
this once, break out of my prison and snatch a few brief hours of
sunshine. The spy had been exploded. He was not likely to pick up my
tracks after all this time and now that my appearance was so altered;
and I did not care much if he did, seeing that he had been shown to be
perfectly harmless. The only circumstance that tended to restrain me
from this folly was the one that mitigated its rashness--the change in
my appearance; and even that, now that I was used to it and knew that
my aspect was neither grotesque nor ridiculous, had little weight, for
Sylvia would be prepared for the change and we could enjoy the joke
together.

I was aware, even at the time, that I was not being quite candid with
myself, for, if I had been, I should obviously have consulted
Thorndyke. Instead of which I answered the letter by return,
announcing my intention of coming to tea on the following day; and
having sent Polton out to post it, spent the remainder of the
afternoon in gleeful anticipation of my little holiday, tempered by
some nervousness as to what Thorndyke would have to say on the matter,
and as to what “my pretty friend,” as Mrs. Samway had very
appropriately called her, would think of my having begun my letter
with the words, “My dear Sylvia.”

Nothing happened to interfere with my nefarious plans.

On the following morning, Thorndyke and Jervis went off after an early
breakfast, leaving me in possession of the premises and master of my
actions. I elected to anticipate the usual luncheon time by half an
hour, and, when this meal was disposed of, I crept to my room and
thoroughly cleansed my hair of the grease which Polton still persisted
in applying to it; for, since my hat would conceal it while I was out
of doors, the added disfigurement was unnecessary. I was even tempted
to tamper slightly with my eyebrows, but this impulse I nobly
resisted; and, having dried my hair and combed it in its normal
fashion, I descended on tip-toe to the sitting-room and wrote a short,
explanatory note to Polton, which I left conspicuously on the table.
Then I switched the door-bell on to the laboratory, and, letting
myself out like a retreating burglar, closed the door silently and
sneaked away down the dark staircase.

Once fairly outside, I went off like a lamplighter, and, shooting out
through the Tudor Street gate, made my way eastward to Broad Street
Station, where I was fortunate enough to catch a train that was just
on the point of starting. At Hampstead Heath Station I got out, and,
snuffing the air joyfully, set forth at my best pace up the slope that
leads to the summit; and in little over twenty minutes found myself at
the gate of “The Hawthorns.”

There was no need to knock or ring. My approach had been observed from
the window, and, as I strode up the garden path, the door opened and
Sylvia ran out to meet me.

“It _was_ nice of you to come!” she exclaimed, as I took her hand and
held it in mine. “I don’t believe you ought to have ventured out, but
I am most delighted all the same. Don’t make a noise; Mopsy is having
a little doze in the drawing room. Come into the morning room and let
me have a good look at you.”

I followed her meekly into the front room, where, in the large bay
window, she inspected me critically, her cheeks dimpling with a
mischievous smile.

“There’s something radically wrong about your eyebrows,” she said,
“but, really, you are not in the least the fright that you made out.
As to the beard and moustache, I am not sure that I don’t rather like
them.”

“I hope you don’t,” I replied, “because, off they come at the first
opportunity--unless, of course, you forbid it.”

“Does my opinion of your appearance matter so much then?”

“It matters entirely. I don’t care what I look like to anyone else.”

“Oh! what a fib!” exclaimed Sylvia. “Don’t I remember how very neatly
turned out you always were when you used to pass me in the lane before
we knew one another?”

“Exactly,” I retorted. “We didn’t know one another then. That makes
all the difference in the world--to me, at any rate.”

“Does it?” she said, colouring a little and looking at me
thoughtfully. “It’s very--very flattering of you to say so, Dr.
Jardine.”

“I hope you don’t mean that as a snub,” I said, rather uneasy at the
form of her reply and thinking of my letter.

“A snub!” she exclaimed. “No, I certainly don’t. What did I say?”

“You called me Dr. Jardine. I addressed you in my letter as
‘Sylvia’--‘My dear Sylvia.’”

“And what ought I to have said?” she asked, blushing warmly and
casting down her eyes.

“Well, Sylvia, if you liked me as well as I like you, I don’t see why
you shouldn’t call me Humphrey. We are quite old friends now.”

“So we are,” she agreed; “and perhaps it _would_ be less formal. So
Humphrey it shall be in future, since that is your royal command. But
tell me, how did you prevail on Dr. Thorndyke to let you come here? Is
there any change in the situation?”

“There’s a change in my situation, and a mighty agreeable change, too.
I’m here.”

“Now don’t be silly. How did you persuade Dr. Thorndyke to let you
come?”

“Ha--that, my dear Sylvia, is a rather embarrassing question. Shall we
change the subject?”

“No, we won’t.” She looked at me suspiciously for a moment and then
exclaimed in low, tragical tones:

“Humphrey! You don’t mean to tell me that you came away without his
knowledge!”

“I’m afraid that is what it amounts to. I saw a loop-hole and I popped
through it; and here I am, as I remarked before.”

“But how dreadful of you! Perfectly shocking! And whatever will he say
to you when you go back?”

“That is a question that I am not proposing to present vividly to my
consciousness until I arrive on the doorstep. I’ve broken out of choky
and I’m going to have a good time--to go on having a good time, I
should say.”

“Then you consider that you are having a good time now?”

“I don’t consider. I am sure of it. Am I not, at this very moment
looking at you? And what more could a man desire?”

She tried to look severe, though the attempt was not strikingly
successful, and retorted in an admonishing tone:

“You needn’t try to wheedle me with compliments. You are a very wicked
person and most indiscreet. But it seems to me that some sort of
change has come over you since you retired from the world. Don’t you
think I’m right?”

“You’re perfectly right. I’ve improved. That’s what it is. Matured and
mellowed, you know, like a bottle of claret that has been left in a
cellar and forgotten. Say you think I’ve improved, Sylvia.”

“I won’t,” she replied, and then, changing her mind, she added: “Yes,
I will. I’ll say that you are more insinuating than ever, if that will
do. And now, as you are clearly quite incorrigible, I won’t scold you
any more, especially as you ‘broke out of choky’ to come and see me.
You shall tell me all about your adventures.”

“I didn’t come here to talk about myself, Sylvia. I came to tell you
something--well, about myself, perhaps, but--er--not my adventures you
know or--or that sort of thing--but, I have been thinking a good deal,
since I have been alone so much--about you, I mean, Sylvia--and--er--
Oh! the deuce!”

The latter exclamation was evoked by the warning voice of the gong,
evidently announcing tea, and the subsequent appearance of the
housemaid; who was certainly not such a goose as she was supposed to
be, for she tapped discreetly at the door and waited three full
seconds before entering; and even then she appeared demurely
unconscious of my existence.

“If you please, Miss Sylvia, Miss Vyne has woke up and I’ve taken in
the tea.”

Such was the paltry interruption that arrested the flow of my
eloquence and scattered my flowers of rhetoric to the winds. I
murmured inwardly, “Blow the tea!” for the opportunity was gone; but I
comforted myself with the reflection that it didn’t matter very much,
since Sylvia and I seemed to have arrived at a pretty clear
understanding; which understanding was further clarified by a
momentary contact of our hands as we followed the maid to the
drawing-room. Miss Vyne was on this occasion, as on the last, seated
in the exact centre of the room, and with the same monumental effect;
so that my thoughts were borne irresistibly to the ethnographical
section of the British Museum and especially to that part of it
wherein the deities of Polynesia look out from their cases in
perennial surprise at the degenerate European visitors. If she had
been asleep previously, she was wide enough awake now; but the
glittering eyes were not directed at me. From the moment of our
entering the room they focussed themselves on Sylvia’s face and there
remained rivetted, whereby the heightening of that young lady’s
complexion, which our interview had produced, became markedly
accentuated. It was to no purpose that I placed myself before the
rigid figure and offered my hand. A paw was lifted automatically to
mine, but the eyes remained fixed on Sylvia.

“What did you say this gentleman’s name was?” the waxwork asked
frigidly.

“This is Dr. Jardine,” was the reply.

“Oh, indeed. And who was the gentleman who called some three weeks
ago?”

“Why, that was Dr. Jardine; you know it was.”

“So I thought, but my memory is not very reliable. And this is a Dr.
Jardine, too? Very interesting. A medical family, apparently. But not
much alike.”

I was beginning to explain my identity and the cause of my altered
appearance, when Sylvia approached with a cup of tea and a carefully
dissected muffin, which latter she thrust under the nose of the elder
lady; who regarded it attentively and with a slight squint, owing to
its nearness.

“It’s of no use, you know,” said Sylvia, “for you to pretend that you
don’t know him, because I’ve told you all about the
transformation--that is, all I know myself. Don’t you think it’s
rather a clever make-up?”

“If,” said Miss Vyne, “by ‘make-up’ you mean a disguise, I think it is
highly successful. The beard is a most admirable imitation.”

“Oh, the beard is his own; at least, I think it is.”

I confirmed this statement, ignoring Polton’s slight additions.

“Indeed,” said Miss Vyne. “Then the wig--it is a wig, I suppose?”

“No, of course it isn’t,” Sylvia replied.

“Then,” said Miss Vyne, majestically, “perhaps you will explain to me
what the disguise consists of.”

“Well,” said Sylvia, “there are the eyebrows. You can see that they
have been completely altered in shape.”

“If I had committed the former shape of the eyebrows to memory, as you
appear to have done,” said Miss Vyne, “I should, no doubt, observe the
change. But I did not. It seems to me that the disguise which you told
me about with such a flourish of trumpets just amounts to this; that
Dr. Jardine has allowed his beard to grow. I find the reality quite
disappointing.”

“Do you?” said Sylvia. “But, at any rate, you didn’t recognize him; so
your disappointment doesn’t count for much.”

The old lady, being thus hoist with her own petard, relapsed into
majestic silence; and Sylvia then renewed her demand for an account of
my adventures.

“We want to hear all about that objectionable person who has been
shadowing you, and how you finally got rid of him. Your letters were
rather sketchy and wanting in detail, so you have got to make up the
deficiency now.”

Thus commanded, I plunged into an exhaustive account of those events
which I have already chronicled at length and which I need not refer
to again, nor need I record the cross-examination to which I was
subjected, since it elicited nothing that is not set forth in the
preceding pages. When I had finished my recital, however, Miss Vyne,
who had listened to it in silence, hitherto, put a question which I
had some doubts about answering.

“Have you or Dr. Thorndyke been able to discover who this inquisitive
person is and what is his object in following you about?”

I hesitated. As to my own experiences, I had no secrets from these
friends of mine, excepting those that related to the subjects of
Thorndyke’s investigations, but I must not come here and babble about
what took place in the sacred precincts of my principal’s chambers.

“I think I may tell you,” said I, “that Dr. Thorndyke has discovered
the identity of this man and that he is not the person whom we
suspected him to be. But I mustn’t say any more, as the information
came through professional channels and consequently is not mine to
give.”

“Of course you mustn’t,” said Sylvia; “though I don’t mind admitting
that you have put me on tenterhooks of curiosity. But I daresay you
will be able to tell us everything later.”

I agreed that I probably should; and the talk then turned into fresh
channels.

The short winter day was running out apace. The daylight had long
since gone, and I began, with infinite reluctance, to think of
returning to my cage. Indeed, when I looked at my watch, I was
horrified to see how the time had fled.

“My word!” I exclaimed. “I must be off, or Thorndyke will be putting
the sleuth-hounds of the law on my track. And I don’t know what you
will think of me for having stayed such an unconscionable time.”

“It isn’t a ceremonial visit,” said Sylvia, as I rose and made my
adieux to her aunt. “We should have liked you to stay much longer.”

Here she paused suddenly, and, clasping her hands, gazed at me with an
expression of dismay.

“Good Heavens! Humphrey!” she exclaimed.

“Eh?” said Miss Vyne.

“I was addressing Dr. Jardine,” Sylvia explained, in some confusion.

“I didn’t suppose you were addressing me,” was the withering reply.

“Do you know,” said Sylvia, “that I haven’t shown you those sketches,
after all. You must see them. They were the special object of your
visit.”

This was perfectly untrue, and she knew it; but I did not think it
worth while to contest the statement in Miss Vyne’s presence.
Accordingly I expressed the utmost eagerness to see the trumpery
sketches, and the more so since I had understood that they were on
view in the studio; which turned out to be the case.

“It won’t take a minute for you to see them,” said Sylvia. “I’ll just
run up and light the gas; and you are not to come in until I tell
you.”

She preceded me up the stairs to the little room on the first floor in
which she worked, and, when I had waited a few moments on the landing
she summoned me to enter.

“These are the sketches,” said she, “that I have finished. You see,
they are quite presentable now. I cleaned off the rough daubs of paint
with a scraper and finished up with a soft rag dipped in chloroform.”

I ran my eye over the framed sketches, which, now that the canvases
were strained on stretchers and the disfiguring brush-strokes removed,
were, as she had said, quite presentable, though too rough and
unfinished to be attractive.

“I daresay they are very interesting,” said I, “but they are only bare
beginnings. I shouldn’t have thought them worth framing.”

“Not as pictures,” she agreed; “but as examples of a very curious
technique, I find them most instructive. However, you haven’t seen the
real gem of the collection. This is it, on the easel. Sit down, on the
chair and say when you are ready. I’m going to give you a surprise.”

I seated myself on the chair opposite the easel, on which was a canvas
with its back towards me.

“Now,” said Sylvia. “Are you ready? One, two, three!”

She picked up the canvas, and, turning it round quickly, presented its
face to me. I don’t know what I had expected--if I had expected
anything; but certainly I was not in the least prepared for what I
saw. The sketch had originally represented, very roughly, a dark mass
of trees which occupied nearly the whole of the canvas; but of this
the middle had been cleaned away, exposing an under painting. And this
it was that filled me with such amazement that, after a first startled
exclamation, I could do nothing but stare open-mouthed at the canvas;
for, from the opening in the dark mass of foliage there looked out at
me, distinct and unmistakable, the face of Mrs. Samway.

It was no illusion or chance resemblance. Rough as the painting was,
the likeness was excellent. All the well-known features which made her
so different from other women were there, though expressed by a mere
dextrous turn of the knife; the jet-black, formally-parted hair, the
clear, bright complexion, the pale, inscrutable eyes; all were there,
even to the steady, penetrating expression that looked out at me from
the canvas as if in silent recognition. As I sat staring at the
picture with a surprise that almost amounted to awe, Sylvia looked at
me a little blankly.

“Well!” she exclaimed, at length, “I meant to give you a surprise,
but--what is it, Humphrey? Do you know her?”

“Yes,” I replied; “and so do you. Don’t you remember a woman who
looked in at you through the glass door of Robinson’s shop?”

“Do you mean that black and scarlet creature? I didn’t recognize her.
I had no idea she was so handsome; for this is really a very beautiful
face, though there is something about it that I don’t understand.
Something--well eerie; rather uncanny and almost sinister. Don’t you
think so?”

“I have always thought her a rather weird woman, but this is the
weirdest appearance she has made. How on earth came her face on that
canvas?”

“It _is_ an odd coincidence. And yet I don’t know that it is. She may
have been some relative of that rather eccentric artist, or even his
wife. I don’t know why it shouldn’t be so.”

Neither did I. But the coincidence remained a very striking one, to
me, at least; much more so than Sylvia realized; though what its
significance might be--if it had any--I could not guess. Nor was there
any opportunity to discuss it at the moment, for it was high time for
me to be gone.

“You will send me a telegram when you get back, to say that you have
arrived home safely, won’t you,” said Sylvia, as we descended the
stairs with our arms linked together. “Of course nothing is going to
happen to you, but I can’t help feeling a little nervous. And you’ll
go down to the station by the High Street, and keep to the main roads.
That is a promise, isn’t it?”

I made the promise readily having decided previously to take every
possible precaution, and, when I had wished Sylvia “good-bye” at some
length, I proceeded to execute it; making my way down the
well-populated High Street and keeping a bright look-out both there
and at the station. Once more I was fortunate in the matter of trains,
and, having taken a hansom from Broad Street to the Temple, was set
down in King’s Bench Walk soon after half-past six.

As I approached our building, I looked up with some anxiety at the
sitting-room windows; and when I saw them brightly lighted, a
suspicion that Thorndyke had returned earlier than usual filled me
with foreboding. I had had my dance and now I was going to pay the
piper, and I did not much enjoy the prospect; in fact, as I ascended
the stairs and took my latch-key from my pocket, I was as nervous as a
school-boy who has been playing truant. However, there was no escape
unless I sneaked up to my bed-room, so, inserting the key into the
lock, I turned it as boldly as I could, and entered.




 CHAPTER XVIII.
 A VISITOR FROM THE STATES

As I pushed open the inner door and entered the room I conceived the
momentary hope of a reprieve from the wrath to come, for I found my
two friends in what was evidently a business consultation with a
stranger, and was on the point of backing out when Thorndyke stopped
me.

“Don’t run away, Howard,” said he. “There are no secrets being
disclosed--at least, I think not. We have finished with your affairs,
Mr. O’Donnell, haven’t we?”

“Yes, doctor,” was the answer; “you’ve run me dry with the exception
of your own little business.”

“Then, come in and sit down, Howard, and let me present you to Mr.
O’Donnell who is a famous American detective and has been telling us
all sorts of wonderful things.”

Mr. O’Donnell paused in the act of returning a quantity of papers to a
large attaché case and offered his hand.

“The doctor,” he remarked, “is blowing his trumpet at the wrong end. I
haven’t come here to give information but to get advice. But I guess I
needn’t tell you that.”

“I hope that isn’t quite true,” said Thorndyke. “You spoke just now of
my little business; haven’t you anything to tell me?”

“I have; but I fancy it isn’t what you wanted to hear. However, we’ll
just have a look at your letter to Curtis and take your questions one
by one. By the way, what made you write to Curtis?”

“I saw, when I inspected Maddock’s will at Somerset House, that he had
left a small legacy to Curtis. Naturally, I inferred that Curtis knew
him and could give me some account of him.”

“It struck you as a bit queer, I reckon, that he should be leaving a
legacy to the head of an American detective agency.”

“The circumstance suggested possibilities,” Thorndyke admitted.

O’Donnell laughed. “I can guess what possibilities suggested
themselves to you, if you knew Maddock. Your letter and the lawyer’s,
announcing the legacy, came within a mail or two of one another.
Curtis showed them both to me and we grinned. We took it for granted
that the worthy testator was foxing. But we were wrong. And so are
you, if that is what you thought.”

“You assumed that the will was not a genuine one?”

“Yes; we thought it was a fake, put up with the aid of some shyster to
bluff us into giving up Mr. Maddock as deceased. So, as I had to come
across about these other affairs, Curtis suggested that I should look
into the matter. And a considerable surprise I got when I did; for the
will is perfectly regular and so is everything else. That legacy was a
sort of posthumous joke, I guess.”

“Then do I understand that Mr. Curtis was not really a friend of
Maddock’s?”

O’Donnell chuckled. “Not exactly a friend, doctor,” said he. “He felt
the warmest interest in Maddock’s welfare, but they weren’t what you
might call bosom friends. The position was this: Curtis was the chief
of our detective agency; Maddock was a gentleman whom he had been
looking for and not finding for a matter of ten years. At last he
found him; and then he lost him again; and this legacy, I take it, was
a sort of playful hint to show which hole he’d gone down.”

“Was Maddock in hiding all that time?” asked Thorndyke.

“In hiding!” repeated O’Donnell. “Bless your innocent heart, doctor,
he had a nice convenient studio in one of the best blocks in New York
a couple of doors from our agency, and he used to send us cards for
his private views. No, sir, our dear departed friend wasn’t the kind
that lurks out of sight in cellars or garrets. It was Maddock, sure
enough, that Curtis wanted, only he didn’t know it. But I guess I’m
fogging you. I’d better answer the questions that you put to Curtis.

“First, do we know anything about Maddock? Yes, we do. But we didn’t
know that his name was Maddock until a few months ago. Isaac Vandamme
was the name we knew him by, and it seems that he had one or two other
names that he used on occasion. We now know that the gay Isaac was a
particularly versatile kind of crook, and a mighty uncommon kind, too,
the Lord be praised; for, if there were many more like him we should
have to raise our prices some. He wasn’t the kind of fool that makes a
million dollar coup and then goes on the razzle and drops it all. That
sort of man is easy enough to deal with. When he’s loaded up with
dollars everybody knows it, and he’s sure to be back in a week or two
with empty pockets, ready for another scoop. Isaac wasn’t that sort.
When he made a little pile, he invested his winnings like a sensible
man and didn’t live beyond his means; and the only mystery to me is
that, when he died, he didn’t leave more pickings. I see from his
will--which I’ve had a look at--that the whole estate couldn’t have
been above five thousand dollars. He had a lot more than that at one
time.”

“He may have disposed of the bulk of his property by gift just before
his death,” Jervis suggested.

“That’s possible,” agreed O’Donnell. “He’d escape the death dues that
way. However, to return to his engaging little ways. His leading line
was penmanship--forgery--and he did it to an absolute finish. He was
the most expert penman that I have ever known. But where he had us all
was that he didn’t only know _how_ to write another man’s name; he
knew _when_ to write it. I reckon that the great bulk of his forgeries
were never spotted at all, and, of the remainder very few got beyond
the bare suspicion that they _were_ forgeries. In the case of the few
that were actually spotted as forgeries, his tracks were covered up so
cleverly that no one could guess who the forger was.”

“And how did you come to suspect him eventually?” Thorndyke asked.

“Ah!” said O’Donnell. “There you are. Every crook--even the
cleverest--has a strain of the fool in him. Isaac’s folly took the
form of suspicion. He suspected us of suspecting him. We didn’t; but
he thought we did, and then he started to dodge and make some false
clues for us. That drew our attention to him. We looked into his
record, traced his little wanderings and then we began to find things
out. A nice collection there was, too, by the time we had worked a
month or two at his biography; forgeries, false notes, and, at least,
two murders that had been a complete mystery to us all. We made ready
to drop on Isaac, but, at that psychological moment, he disappeared.
It looked as if he had left the States, and, as we have no great
affection for extradition cases, we let the matter rest, more or less,
expecting that he would turn up again, sooner or later. And then came
this lawyer’s letter and yours, announcing his decease. Of course
Curtis and I thought he was at the old game; that it was a bit of that
sort of extra caution that won’t let well alone. So, as I was coming
over, I thought I’d just look into the affair as I told you; and, to
my astonishment, I found everything perfectly regular; the will
properly proved, the death certificate made out correctly and a second
certificate signed by two doctors.”

“Did you go into the question of identity?” asked Thorndyke.

“Oh, yes. I called on one of the doctors, a man named Batson, and
ascertained that it was all correct. Batson’s eyesight seemed to be
none of the best, but he made it quite clear to me that his late
patient was certainly our friend Isaac, or Maddock. So that’s the end
of the case. And if you want to go into it any further you’ve got to
deal with a little pile of bone ash, for our friend is not only dead;
he’s cremated. That’s enough for us. We don’t follow our clients to
the next world. We are not so thorough as you seem to be.”

“You are flattering me unduly,” said Thorndyke. “I’m not so thorough
as that; but our clients, when they betake themselves to the happy
hunting-ground, usually leave a few of their friends behind to
continue their activities. Do you happen to know what Maddock’s
original occupation was? Had he any profession?”

“He was originally an engraver, and a very skilful engraver, too, I
understand. That was what made him so handy in working the flash note
racket. Then he went on the stage for a time, and didn’t do badly at
that; but I fancy he was more clever at making-up and mimicry than at
acting in the dramatic sense. For the last ten years or so he was
practising as a painter--chiefly of landscape, though he could do a
figure subject or a portrait at a pinch. I don’t fancy he sold much,
or made any great efforts to sell his work. He liked painting and the
art covered his real industries, for he used to tour about in search
of subjects and so open up fresh ground for the little operations that
actually produced his income.”

“Was his work of any considerable merit?” Thorndyke asked.

“Well, in a way, yes. It was rather in the American taste, though
Maddock was really an Englishman. Our taste, as you know, runs to
technical smartness and novelty of handling; and Maddock’s work was
very peculiar and remarkably smart and slick in handling. He used the
knife more than the brush and he used it uncommonly cleverly. In fact,
he was unusually skilful in many ways; and that’s the really
surprising thing about him, when one considers his
extraordinary-looking paws.”

“What was there peculiar about his hands?” asked Thorndyke. “Were they
noticeably clumsy in appearance?”

“Clumsy!” exclaimed O’Donnell. “They were more than that. They were
positively deformed. A monkey’s hands would be delicate compared with
Maddock’s. They were short and thick like the paws of an animal.
There’s some jaw-twisting name for the deformity that he suffered
from; bronchodactilious, or something like that.”

“Brachydactylous,” suggested Thorndyke.

“That’s the word; and I daresay you know the sort of paw I mean. It
didn’t look a very likely hand for a first-class penman and engraver
of flash notes, but you can’t always judge by appearances. And now as
to your other questions: You ask what Maddock was like in appearance.
I can only give you the description which I gave to Batson and which
he recognized at once.”

“Had he noticed the peculiarity of the hands?” enquired Thorndyke.

“Yes. I asked him about it and he remembered having observed it when
he was attending Maddock. Well, then, our friend was about five feet
nine in height, fairly broad and decidedly strong, of a medium
complexion with grey eyes and darkish brown hair. That’s all I can
tell you about him.”

“You haven’t got his finger-prints, I suppose?”

“No. He was never in prison, so we had no chance of getting them.”

“Was he married?”

“He had been; but some years ago his wife divorced him, or he divorced
her. Latterly he has lived as a bachelor.”

“There is nothing else that you can think of as throwing light on his
personality or explaining his actions?”

“Nothing at all, doctor. I’ve told you all I know about him, and I
only hope the information may be more useful than it looks to me.”

“Thank you,” said Thorndyke; “your information is not only useful; I
expect to find it quite valuable. Reasoning, you know, Mr. O’Donnell,”
he continued, “is somewhat like building an arch. On a supporting
mould, the builder lays a number of shaped stones, or voussoirs; but
until all the voussoirs are there, it is a mere collection of stones,
incapable of bearing its own weight. Then you drop the last
voussoir--the keystone--into its place, and the arch is complete; and
now you may take away the supports, for it will not only bear its own
weight, but carry a heavy superstructure.”

“That’s so, doctor,” said O’Donnell. “But, if I may ask, is this all
gratuitous wisdom or has it any particular bearing?”

“It has this bearing,” replied Thorndyke. “I have myself been, for
some time past, engaged, metaphorically, in the building of an arch.
When you came here to-night, it was but a collection of shaped and
adjusted stones, supported from without. With your kind aid, I have
just dropped the keystone into its place. That is what I mean.”

The American thoughtfully arranged the papers in his case, casting an
occasional speculative glance at Thorndyke.

“I’d like to know,” he said presently, “what it was that I told you.
It doesn’t seem to me that I have produced any startling novelties.
However, I know it’s no use trying to squeeze you, so I’ll get back to
my hotel and have a chew at what you’ve told me.”

He shook hands with us all round, and, when Thorndyke had let him out,
we heard him bustling downstairs and away up King’s Bench Walk towards
Mitre Court.

For a minute or more after his departure none of us spoke. Thorndyke
was apparently ruminating on his newly-acquired information, and
Jervis and I on the statement that had so naturally aroused the
detective’s curiosity.

At length Jervis opened the inevitable debate.

“I begin to see a glimmer of daylight through the case of Septimus
Maddock, deceased,” said he; “but it is only a glimmer. Whereas, from
what you said to O’Donnell, I gather that you have the case quite
complete.”

“Hardly that, Jervis,” was the reply. “I spoke metaphorically, and
metaphors are sometimes misleading. Perhaps I overstated the case; so
we will drop metaphor and state the position literally in terms of
good, plain, schoolboy logic. It is this: we had certain facts
presented to us in connection with Maddock’s death. For instance, we
observed that the cause of death was obscure, that the body was
utterly destroyed by cremation and that Jardine, who was an unofficial
witness to some of the formalities, was subsequently pursued by some
unknown person with the unmistakable purpose of murdering him. Those
were some of the observed facts; and the explanation of those facts
was the problem submitted to us; that is to say, we had to connect
those facts and supply others by deduction and research, so that they
should form a coherent and intelligible sequence, of which the motive
for murdering Jardine should form a part.

“Having observed and examined our facts, we next propose a hypothesis
which shall explain them. In this case it would naturally take the
form of a hypothetical reconstruction of the circumstances of
Maddock’s death. That hypothesis must, of course, be in complete
agreement with all the facts known to us, including the attempts to
murder Jardine. Then, having invented a hypothesis which fits our
facts completely, the next stage is to verify it. If the circumstances
of Maddock’s death were such as we have assumed, certain antecedent
events must have occurred and certain conditions must have existed. We
make the necessary inquiries and investigations, and we find that
those events had actually occurred and those conditions had actually
existed. Then it is probable that our hypothesis is correct,
particularly if our researches have brought to light nothing that
disagrees with it.

“With our new facts we can probably amplify our hypothesis;
reconstruct it in greater detail; and then we have to test and verify
it afresh in its amplified and detailed form. And if such new tests
still yield an affirmative result, the confirmation of the hypothesis
becomes overwhelmingly strong. It is, however, still only hypothesis.
But perhaps we light on some final test which is capable of yielding a
definite answer, yes or no. If we apply that test--the ‘Crucial
Experiment’ of the logicians--and obtain an affirmative result, our
inquiry is at an end. It has passed out of the region of hypothesis
into that of demonstrative proof.”

“And are we to understand,” asked Jervis, “that you have brought
Maddock’s case to the stage of complete demonstration?”

“No,” answered Thorndyke. “I am still in the stage of hypothesis; and
when O’Donnell came here to-night there were two points which I had
been unable to verify. But with his aid I have been able to verify
them both, and I now have a complete hypothesis of the case which has
been tested exhaustively and has answered to every test. All that
remains to be done is to apply the touchstone of the final
experiment.”

“I suppose,” said Jervis, “you have obtained a good many new facts in
the course of your investigations?”

“Not a great many,” replied Thorndyke; “and what new data I have
obtained, I have, for the most part, communicated to you and Jardine.
I assure you, Jervis, that if you would only concentrate your
attention on the case, you have ample material for a most convincing
and complete elucidation of it.”

Jervis looked at me with a wry smile.

“Now, Jardine-Howard,” said he; “why don’t you brush up your wits and
tell us exactly what happened to the late Mr. Maddock and why some
person unknown is so keen on your vile body. You have all the facts,
you know.”

“So you tell me,” I retorted; “but this case of yours reminds me of
those elaborate picture puzzles that used to weary my juvenile brain.
You had a hatful of irregular-shaped pieces which, if you fitted them
together, made a picture. Only the beggars wouldn’t fit together.”

“A very apt comparison,” said Thorndyke. “You put the pieces together,
and, if they made no intelligible part of a picture, you knew you were
wrong, no matter how well they seemed to fit. On the other hand, if
they seemed to make parts of a picture you had to verify the result by
finding pieces of the exact shape and size of the empty spaces. That
is what I have been doing in this case; trying the data together and
watching to see if they made the expected picture. As I have told you,
O’Donnell’s visit found me with the picture entire save for two empty
spaces of a particular shape and size; and from him I obtained two
pieces that dropped neatly into those spaces and made the picture
complete. All I have to do now is to see if the picture is a true
representation or only a consistent work of imagination.”

“I take it that you have worked the case out in pretty full detail,”
said Jervis.

“Yes. If the final verification is successful I shall be able to tell
you exactly what happened in Maddock’s house, what was the cause of
death--and I may say that it was not that given in the
certificates--who the person is who has been pursuing Jardine and what
is his motive, together with a number of other very curious items of
information. And the mention of that person reminds me that our friend
has been disporting himself in public, contrary to advice and to what
I thought was a definite understanding.”

“But surely,” I said, “it doesn’t matter now. We have given that spy
chappie the slip, and, even if he hasn’t given up the chase as
hopeless, we know that he is quite harmless.”

“Harmless!” exclaimed Thorndyke. “Why, my dear fellow, he was your
guardian angel. Didn’t you realize that from Father Humperdinck’s
statement? He shadowed you so closely that no attack on you was
possible; in fact, he actually caught a rap on the head that was
apparently meant for you. You were infinitely safer with him at your
heels than alone.”

“But we’ve given the other fellow the slip, too,” I urged.

“We mustn’t take that for granted,” said Thorndyke. “The French
detective, you remember, came on the scene quite recently, whereas the
other man has been with us from the beginning. He probably saw Jervis
and me enter the mineral water works on the night of the fire, for he
was certainly there; and he may even have followed us home to
ascertain who we were. There are several ways in which he could have
connected you with us and traced you here; so I must urge you most
strongly not to venture out of the precincts of the Temple for the
next few days, in fact, it would be much wiser to keep indoors
altogether. It will be only a matter of days unless I get a quite
unexpected set back, for I hope to have the case finally completed in
less than a week; and when I do, I shall take such action as will give
your friend some occupation other than shadowing you.”

“Very well,” I said. “I will promise not to attempt again to escape
from custody. But, all the same, my little jaunt to-day has not been
entirely without result. I have picked up a new fact, and a rather
curious one, I think. What should you say if I suggested that Mrs.
Samway was the wife of that eccentric artist who used to paint on the
Heath? The man, I mean, who always worked in gloves?”

“I have assumed that she was in some such relation to him,” replied
Thorndyke, “but I should like to hear the evidence.”

“Mrs. Samway,” Jervis said in a reflective tone: “isn’t that the
handsome, uncanny-looking lady with the mongoose eyes, who reminded me
of Lucrezia Borgia?”

“That is the lady. Well, I met with a portrait of her to-day which was
evidently the work of the man with the gloves;” and here I gave them a
description of the portrait and an account of the odd way in which it
had been disinterred from the landscape that had been painted over it,
to which they both listened with close attention.

“It’s a queer incident,” said Thorndyke, “and quite dramatic. If one
were inclined to be superstitious one might imagine some invisible
agency uncovering the tracks that have been so carefully hidden and
working unseen in the interests of justice. But haven’t you rather
jumped to your conclusion? The existence of the portrait establishes a
connection, but not necessarily that of husband and wife.”

“I only suggested the relationship; but it seemed a likely one as the
portrait had been painted over and thrown into the rubbish box.”

Jervis laughed sardonically; and even Thorndyke’s impassive face
relaxed into a smile.

“Our young friend,” said the former, “doesn’t take as favourable a
view of the married state as one might expect from a gay Lothario who
breaks out of his cage to go a-philandering. But we’ll overlook that,
in consideration of the very interesting information that he has
brought back with him. Not that it conveys very much to me. It is
obviously a new piece to fit into our puzzle, but I’m hanged if I see,
at the moment, any suitable space to drop it into.”

“I think,” said Thorndyke, “that if you consider the picture as a
whole, you will soon find a vacant space. And while you are
considering it, I will just send off a letter, and then we had better
adjourn this discussion. We have to catch the early train to Maidstone
to-morrow, and that, I hope, will be the last time. Our case ought to
be disposed of by the afternoon.”

He seated himself at the writing-table and wrote his letter, while
Jervis stared into the fire with a cogitative frown. When the letter
was sealed and addressed, Thorndyke laid it on the table while he went
to the lobby to put on his hat and coat, and, glancing at it almost
unconsciously, I noted that the envelope was of foolscap size and was
addressed to the Home Office, Whitehall. The name of the addressee
escaped me, for, suddenly realizing the impropriety of thus inspecting
another man’s letter, I looked away hastily; but even then, when
Thorndyke had taken it away to the post, I found myself speculating
vaguely on the nature of the communication and wondering if it had any
relation to the mysterious and intricate case of Septimus Maddock.




 CHAPTER XIX.
 TENEBRAE

The resigned composure with which I accepted Thorndyke’s sentence of
confinement within doors was not entirely attributable to discretion
or native virtue. My resolution to follow scrupulously my principal’s
very pointed advice was somewhat like the ascetic resolutions formed
by the gourmet as he rises replete from the banquet table; for, just
as the latter is in a peculiarly favourable condition for the unmoved
contemplation of a--temporary--abstinence from food, so I, having
enjoyed my little dissipation, could now contemplate with fortitude a
brief period of retirement. Moreover, the weather was in my favour,
being--as Polton reported, when he returned, blue-nosed and powdered
with snow, with a fresh supply of tobacco for me--bitterly cold, with
a threatening of smoky fog from the east.

Under these circumstances it was no great hardship to sit in a roomy
armchair with my slippered feet on the kerb and read and meditate as I
basked in the warmth of a glowing fire; though, to be sure, my reading
was perfunctory enough, for the treatise of “The Surface Markings of
the Human Body,” admirable as it was, competed on very unfavourable
terms with other claimants to my attention. In truth, I had plenty to
think about even if I went no farther for matter than to the events of
the previous day. There was my visit to Sylvia, for instance. I had
not said much to her, but what I had said had pledged me to a
life-long companionship; which was a solemn thing to reflect upon even
though I looked forward to the fulfilment of that pledge with nothing
but hopeful pleasure. The dice were thrown. Of course they would turn
up sixes, every one; but still--the dice were thrown.

From my own strictly personal affairs my thoughts rambled by an easy
transition to the singular episode of the buried portrait, and thence
to the subject of that strange palimpsest. Viewed by the light of Mr.
O’Donnell’s revelations, Mrs. Samway’s position was not all that could
have been desired. She and her husband had unquestionably been closely
associated with Maddock; but Maddock was, it seemed, a habitual
criminal. Could this fact have been known to the Samways? Or was it
that the cunning forger and swindler had sheltered himself behind
their respectability. It was impossible for me to say.

Then there was the strange and perplexing case of the man Maddock,
himself. I could make nothing of that, had not, indeed, been aware
that there had been a “case,” until Thorndyke’s investigations had put
me in possession of the fact. And even now I could see nothing on
which to base any suspicion, apart from the attempts on my life, which
we were assuming to be in some way connected with events that had
occurred in Maddock’s house. The cause of death was apparently not
“Morbus Cordis”; which might easily enough be, seeing that the
diagnosis of heart disease was a mere guess on Batson’s part. But if
not Morbus Cordis, what was it? Thorndyke apparently knew, and seemed
to hint that it was something other than ordinary disease.

Could there have been foul play? And, if so, were the Samways involved
in it in any way? It seemed incredible, for had not Maddock himself
suspected that he was in a dangerous state of health. There was
certainly one possibility which I considered with a good deal of
distaste; namely, that Maddock had been in a hypochondriacal state and
that the Samways had taken advantage of his gloomy views as to his
health to administer poison. The thing was actually possible; but I
did not entertain it; for, even if one assumed that poison had been
administered, at any rate, the cremation of the body was not designed
to hide the traces of the crime. The Samways had nothing to do with
that; the cremation had been adopted in preference to burial by
Maddock’s own wish.

So my thoughts flitted from topic to topic, with occasional interludes
of “Surface Markings,” through the lazy forenoon until Polton came to
lay my solitary luncheon. And after this little break in the
comfortable monotony, another spell of meditative idleness set in.
Polton was busy upstairs in the laboratory with some photographic
copying operations and I was disposed to wander up and look on; but my
small friend politely but very firmly vetoed any such proceeding. On
some other occasion he would be delighted to show me the working of
the great copying camera, but, just now, he had a big job in hand,
and, as he was working against time, he would prefer to be alone. He
even suggested that I might attend to any stray callers and make my
own tea on the gas-ring so as to avoid interrupting his work; and when
I had agreed to relieve him to this extent, he thanked me profusely
and retired and I saw no more of him.

For some time after his departure, I stood at the window looking out
across the wide space at Paper Buildings and the end of Crown Office
Row. It was a wretched afternoon. The yellow, turbid sky brooded close
upon the houseroofs and grew darker and more brown moment by moment,
as if the invisible sun had given the day up in despair and gone home
early. A comfortless powdering of snow filtered down at intervals and
melted on the pavements, along which depressed wayfarers hurried with
their coat collars turned up and their hands thrust deep into their
pockets. I watched them commiseratingly, reflecting on the superior
advantages of being within doors and forbidden to go out; and then,
having flung another scoopful of coal on the fire, I betook myself
once more to the armchair, the “Surface Markings” and idle meditation.

It was some time past four when my reflective browsings had begun to
proceed in the direction of the tea-kettle, that I heard a light
footstep on the landing as of someone wearing goloshes. Then a letter
dropped softly into the box, and, as I instantly pushed back my chair
to rise, the footsteps retreated. I crossed the room quickly and
opened the door; but the messenger had already disappeared down the
dark staircase, and had gone so silently on his rubber soles that,
though I listened attentively, I could hear no sound from below.

Having closed the door, I extracted the letter from the box and took
it over to the window to examine it, when I was not a little surprised
to find that it was addressed to W.M. Howard, Esq. This was the first
communication that I had received in my borrowed name, and my surprise
at its arrival was not unreasonable, for, of the few persons who knew
me by that name, none--with the exception, perhaps, of Mr.
Marchmont--was in the least likely to write to me.

But, if the address on the envelope had surprised me, the letter
itself surprised me a good deal more; for though the writer was quite
unknown to me, even by name, he seemed to be in possession of certain
information concerning me which I had supposed to be the exclusive
property of Thorndyke, Jervis, Polton and myself. It bore the address,
29, Fig-tree Court, Inner Temple, and ran thus:


 “Dear Sir,

 “I am taking the liberty of writing to you to ask for your assistance
 as I happen to know that my friends, Drs. Thorndyke and Jervis, are
 away at Maidstone and not available at the moment, and I understand
 that you have some acquaintance with medical technicalities.

 “The circumstances are these. At half-past five to-day I shall be
 meeting a solicitor to advise as to action in respect of a case in
 which I am retained; and the decision as to our action will be vitally
 affected by a certain issue on which I am not competent to form an
 opinion for lack of medical knowledge. If Dr. Thorndyke had been
 within reach I should have taken his opinion; as he is not, it
 occurred to me to ask if you would fill his place on this occasion, it
 being, of course, understood that the usual fee of five guineas will
 be paid by the solicitor.

 “If you should be unable to come to the consultation, do not trouble
 to reply, as I am now going out and shall not be returning until
 five-thirty, the time of the appointment. I am,

                                              “Yours faithfully,
                                              “Arthur Courtland.”


The contents of this letter, as I have said, surprised me more than a
little. How, in the name of all that was wonderful, had this stranger,
whose very name was unknown to me, come to be aware that I had any
knowledge of medicine? Not from Thorndyke, I felt perfectly sure; nor
from Jervis, who, notwithstanding a certain flippant facetiousness of
manner, was really an extremely cautious and judicious man. Could it
be that my principal was overseen in his trusted laboratory assistant?
Was it conceivable that the suave and discreet Polton had moments of
leakiness, when, in unofficial talk outside, he let drop the secrets
of which his employer’s unbounded confidence had made him the
repository? I could not believe it. Not only did Polton appear to be
the very soul of discretion; there was Thorndyke himself; he was not
the man to give his confidence to anyone until after the most
exhaustive proof of the safety of so giving it. Nor was he a man who
was likely to be deceived; for nothing escaped his observation, and
nothing that he observed was passed over without careful
consideration.

My lethargy having been shaken off, I addressed myself to the task of
preparing tea; and, as I listened to the homely crescendo of the
kettle’s song, I turned the matter over in all its bearings. By some
means this Mr. Courtland had become aware that I was either a doctor
or a medical student. But by what means? Was it possible that he had
merely inferred from the circumstance of my being associated with
Thorndyke that I was of the same profession? That was just barely
conceivable; but, if he had, then, as Jervis had said of Father
Humperdinck, he must be “a devil at guessing.”

As I made the tea and subsequently consumed it, I continued to
ruminate on the contents of that singular letter. No answer to it was
required. Then what was Mr. Courtland going to do if I did not turn
up? He admitted that the issue, which seemed to be an important one,
was beyond him, and yet he had to give an answer to the solicitor. And
he was prepared to pay five guineas for the advice of a man of whom
he--presumably--knew nothing. That was odd. In fact, the whole tone of
the letter, with its inconsistent mixture of urgency and casual
trusting to chance, seemed irreconcilable with the care and method
that one expects from a professional man.

And there was another point. The time of the consultation was
half-past five. Now within an hour of that time Thorndyke would be
back--or even sooner if he came by the earlier train as he had done on
the previous day--as Mr. Courtland must have known, since he knew
whither my principal had gone, and he must have often attended assizes
himself. Could he not have waited an hour? And again; had this
business been sprung upon him so suddenly that he had had no time to
get Thorndyke’s opinion? And, yet again, why had he written at all,
instead of dropping in at our chambers with the solicitor, as was so
commonly done by Thorndyke’s clients?

All of which were curious and puzzling questions which I put to
myself, one by one, and had to dismiss unanswered. And then I came to
the practical question, to which I had to find an answer, and which
was: Could I, under the existing circumstances, accede to Mr.
Courtland’s request? To go outside the precincts of the Inn was, I
recognized, absolutely forbidden; but I had given no actual promise to
remain in our chambers, nor had I been positively forbidden to leave
them. Thorndyke had advised me to remain indoors, and his advice had
been given so pointedly and with so evident a desire that it should be
followed that I had not hitherto even thought of leaving our premises.
But this was an unforeseen contingency; and the question was, did it
alter my position in regard to Thorndyke’s advice?

I think I have never been so undecided in my life. On the one hand, I
was strongly tempted to keep the appointment. The prospect of
triumphantly handing to Thorndyke a five-guinea fee which I had earned
as his deputy appealed to me with almost irresistible force. On the
other hand, my knowledge of Thorndyke did not support this appeal. I
knew him to be a man to whom a principle was much more important than
any chance benefit gained by its abandonment, and my inner
consciousness told me that he would be better pleased by a strict
adherence to our understanding than by the increment of five guineas.

So my thoughts oscillated, to and fro, now impelling me to risk it and
earn the fee, and now urging me to keep to the letter of my
instructions; and, meanwhile, the time ran on and the hour of the
consultation approached. What decision I should have reached, in the
end, it is impossible to say. As matters turned out, I never reached
any decision at all, for, just as the Treasury clock struck a quarter
past five, I heard a light, quick step on our landing and immediately
after a soft but hurried knock at the door.

I strode quickly across the room and threw the door open. And then I
started back with an exclamation of astonishment. For the visitor--who
stood full in the light of the landing-lamp--was a woman; and the
woman was Mrs. Samway.

As I stood gazing at her in amazement, she slipped past me into the
room and softly shut the door. And then I saw very plainly that there
was something amiss, for she was as pale as death, and had a dreadful,
frightened, hunted look which haunts me even now as I write. She was
somewhat dishevelled, too, and, though it was a bitter evening, her
plump, shapely hands were ungloved and cold as ice, as I noted when I
took them in mine.

“Are you alone?” she asked, peering uneasily at the door of the little
office.

“Yes. Quite alone,” I replied.

She gazed at me with those strange, penetrating eyes of hers and said
in a half-whisper: “How strange you look with that beard. I should
hardly have known you if I had not expected--”

She stopped short, and, casting a strange, scared glance over her
shoulder at the dark windows, whispered:

“Can they see in? Can anyone see us from outside?”

“I shouldn’t think so,” I replied; but, nevertheless, I stepped over
to the windows and drew the curtains.

“That looks more comfortable, at any rate,” said I. “And now tell me
how in the name of wonder you knew I was here.”

She grasped both my wrists and looked earnestly--almost fiercely--into
my eyes.

“Ask me no questions!” she exclaimed. “Ask me nothing! But listen. I
have come here for a purpose. Has a letter been left here for you?”

“Yes,” I replied.

“Asking you to go to a place in Fig-tree Court?”

“Good God!” I exclaimed. “How on earth--”

She shook my wrists impatiently in her strong grasp. “Answer me!” she
exclaimed; “answer me!”

“Yes,” I replied. “I was to go there at half-past five.”

Again her strong grasp tightened on my wrists. “Humphrey,” she said,
in a low, earnest voice, “you are not to go. Do you hear me? You are
not to go.” And then, as I seemed to hesitate, she continued more
urgently: “I ask you--I beg you to promise me that you won’t.”

I gazed at her in sheer amazement; but some instinct, some faint
glimmer of understanding, restrained me from asking for any
explanation.

“Very well,” I said. “I won’t go if you say I’m not to.”

“That is a promise?”

“Yes, it’s a promise. Besides, it’s nearly half-past already, so if I
don’t go now, the appointment falls through.”

“And you won’t go outside these rooms to-night. Promise me that, too.”

“If I don’t go to this lawyer, I shan’t go out at all.”

“And to-morrow, too. Give me your word that you won’t let any sort of
pretext draw you out of these rooms to-morrow, or the next day, or, in
fact, until Dr. Thorndyke says you may.”

For a few moments I was literally struck dumb with astonishment at her
last words, and could do nothing but gaze at her in astounded silence.
At length, recovering myself a little, I exclaimed:

“My dear Mrs. Samway--,” but she interrupted me.

“Don’t call me by that horrible name! Give me my own name, Letitia;
or,” she added, a little shyly and in a soft, coaxing tone, “call me
Lettie. Won’t you, Humphrey, just for this once? You needn’t mind. You
wouldn’t if you knew. I should like, when I think of my friend--the
only friend that I care for--to remember that he called me by my own
name when he said good-bye. You’ll think me silly and sentimental, but
you needn’t mind indulging me just once. It’s the last time.”

“The last time!” I repeated. “What do you mean by that, Lettie, and by
speaking of our saying good-bye? Are you going away?”

“Yes, I am going away. I don’t suppose you will ever see me again. I
am going out of your life.”

“Not out of my life, Lettie. We are always friends, even if we never
see one another.”

“Are we?” she said, looking up at me earnestly. “Perhaps it is so; but
still, this is good-bye. I ought to say it and go; but O God!” she
exclaimed with sudden passion, “I don’t want to go--away from you,
Humphrey, out into the cold and the dark!”

She buried her face against my shoulder, and I could feel that she was
sobbing though she uttered no sound.